Last time, I finally finished talking about the sixth reason for the longevity of Chinese culture and downplaying competition. Now I want to move on to the seventh reason, which is to guard against extremes. This reason is the most important reason for the longevity of Chinese culture. I talked about eight reasons, but the most important reason is the seventh reason. If I just talk about it now, you still don’t understand it. But if I explain it in detail, everyone will understand it.
After all the cultures of the same age have withered one by one, Chinese culture has been able to continue stumbling down. A very important reason why it will continue to go forward today is that our culture guards against extremes in its basic thinking. In fact, everyone who knows knows that I am talking about the golden mean. I have talked about the golden mean many times, but I want to make it very clear in class that this is my grasp of a core value of Chinese culture. I think a very important point in Chinese culture is the golden mean.
Moderation and extremism
"Zhong" means the middle value; "Yong" refers to the ordinary state, that is, the state of ordinary people, which can also be understood as the mediocre state. Because the ordinary state is actually an ordinary continued state. Let me say it again, the word "zhongyong", "zhong" refers to the middle value, and "yong" refers to the normal state and the continuation state. Once this is clear, we will know that the reason why Chinese culture has a very long life is that it takes the middle value and the normal state on all major issues, and then seeks continuation. This seems to be just a working method, but in fact it is an important thinking choice.
On the surface, it is a way of doing things. When we do things, we must always look forward and make things successful. However, if you want to really do something successfully, you have to look back at the more normal general situation, and try to find a suitable, appropriate, feasible way, a way that most people can accept. Let me say it again, if you want to accomplish something, of course you have to look ahead. When you look forward, you have to look back, take a look at the more normal general situation, and find a suitable way, a proper way, a feasible way, and a way that most people can accept.
To do this, you should not act intensely or be sensational. To put it more philosophically, this flexible philosophy is a flexible and soft state, a calm two-phase compromise, and a gray zone of generosity. This has been the spiritual and behavioral main axis of Chinese culture for thousands of years.
Therefore, I attach great importance to the position of the word "gold mean" in the history of Chinese culture, and I think it is this flexible philosophy, this soft state, and this zone of generosity that has led Chinese culture down through thousands of years to today, and will continue to do so.
Chinese culture has such a long history and has suffered so many disasters. At many times, it seems that it can no longer go on, just like other great civilizations in the world that finally collapsed on that day. But the strange thing is that China has made it through time and time again, overcoming disasters and destruction, and surviving step by step. Look carefully, how did he transform at each critical moment of life and death? Moderation plays a very important role.
Why can moderation avoid disaster? When I speak about this point around the world, I often receive applause. I said, you just think that Doctrine of the Mean is a Chinese philosophical concept. Let me tell you, the most fundamental idea of ​​Doctrine of the Mean is to oppose all extremism.
What I want to tell you is that extremism is very charming, and what is scary about extremism is that it is very charming. Extremism wouldn't be scary if it was ugly inside and out. The scary thing about it is that it is often like Prometheus standing on a cliff, often like a hero who is not afraid of sacrifice, exuding the glory of heroes, and their slogans are so loud, so refreshing, and touching. Therefore, extremism always has a large number of followers, admirers, and die-hard loyalists, and it is impossible to persuade them back.
We have also experienced such extremism, such as the Boxer Rebellion in modern times and the "Cultural Revolution" in contemporary times. When these representatives of extremism first appeared, they really made people feel like heroes standing on the edge of a cliff. Their words were so loud and melodious, and they made people want to shout slogans. But for the general public, slogans are not road signs, heroes are not guides, and cliffs are not highways. For these heroes on the edge of the cliff, there is actually no way out. Why are you standing on the edge of a cliff? Since he had no place to go, they would still have a fuss for a while, but the matter was essentially over.
This is a loud short-lived, fierce rapid decay. Extremists will not only block time and decay, but also block space. Sooner or later, they cannot even tolerate those followers, exhorters, remonstrators, and correctors, and expel these people one by one as rebels, clinging to an increasingly narrow so-called fundamentalism all alone. Therefore, their cramped space intensified their cramped time, so their demise was inevitable.
cultural instinct
Compared with them, Zhongyong doesn't have such a moving image of a hero. Moderation is always so plain, so homely, so low-key, and does not attract any cheers or cheers. Zhongyong was just walking slowly and slowly, asking around, just discussing and persuading in a low voice, but after a while, a path was found, an understanding was reached, a lot of words were saved, and a fierce fight was avoided. It seems like nothing happened, except that everyone can live on, and live on in a smooth and happy way.
Chinese culture as a whole rejects extremism and believes in moderation. In my book "The Way of the Gentleman", I introduced the repeated teachings of ancient classics on this issue. This teaching is very effective and has penetrated deeply into the hearts of the earth for thousands of years. As a result, even those foreign religions that easily fall into extremism lose their murderous spirit and gain a harmonious demeanor as soon as they integrate into Chinese culture.
There has been a period in China when some figures were bewitched by extremism, but this cannot change the collective choices of the entire people over thousands of years. Therefore, since extremism has always been opposed in China, once it emerges, its methods may become even more extreme. But it’s useless no matter how extreme it is, it’s just a passing cloud. Because of thousands of years of collective choices, collective personality has been precipitated. As a result, moderation is not an expedient but a cultural instinct.
So among all major civilizations, why can China practice moderation in all aspects? After all, this has something to do with farming civilization. Agricultural civilization depends on the weather and obeys the cycle of the four seasons. If you ask the farmers in the countryside, they all know that even if the weather is not extremely cold, if it is extremely cold, spring has bloomed; if it is not extremely hot in summer, if it is extremely hot, the autumn wind will start again. This thinking of the unity of nature and man has become a cultural consensus after the promotion of "Book of Changes" and the summary by Confucius and others. The "Book of Rites" more clearly makes the classic judgment that "a gentleman is against the mean, and a villain is against the mean." This also expresses the basic principle of Chinese culture in terms of collective personality, that is, if you are against the mean, you are not a true Chinese in terms of personality.
There are some other religions and philosophies in the world that also have the doctrine of moderation. For example, there is a very famous Nagarjuna in India, sometimes called Nagarjuna Bodhisattva. He proposed the Middle Way. I often use his concepts when studying Buddhism. However, it was only in China that Doctrine became a long-term popularization in secular life and became a practical state that no one can ignore. Remember, not a theoretical state, but a practical state. And it is not a practice of a few people, but a practice in the secular life of the vast majority of ordinary Chinese people.
Thank you, I will talk about it next time.