Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu, and today I’m going to talk about a major practical project for the longevity of Chinese culture. This project lasted for more than 1,300 years. It was really a big project, and it was called the imperial examination system. First of all, I want to get rid of a misunderstanding that everyone thinks that the imperial examination system is to select the best poets and essayists. Mistaken, no. The imperial examination system selects managers at all levels, which we generally call civil servants.
No matter what circumstances a society, a country, or a system needs to continue, it needs a vast management team. In some places in the world, civilization finally collapsed. There are various reasons. One reason is that there are not enough managers. Many places are out of control, and many industries are out of control. There are many managers, but they are incompetent or do not have enough prestige, so they are actually out of control. Well, China, like other civilizations, wanted to choose such managers, so the imperial examination system emerged. This is how the imperial examination system came about. Why is it important? I would like to cite a few points to illustrate, that is, the advantages of the imperial examination system.
Preserving cultural soil and unified selection
First, from the perspective of the imperial court, a large country needs many management talents. But from a cultural perspective, that is, from a Chinese cultural perspective, it also requires dense layers of management talents. Does anyone know? When a country becomes broken, the culture often can only be broken as well. Therefore, under this situation, preserving the soil of culture is a very important mission of culture, and the imperial examination system assumed this mission. It not only selected management talents for the imperial court, but also selected the soil for cultural preservation. This is the first point, and I think everyone can understand this meaning.
Second, other major civilizations, at the beginning, formed a good management system because they were led by a generation of heroes and had many capable comrades under him. However, because the area is too large and there are too many directions, it is easy for local managers to form their own pattern. Over time, divisions will occur. However, the imperial examination system is unified across the country, and unified selection is completed with unified standards and unified institutions. This approach blocks the possibility of fragmentation and in turn protects the culture.
Do you understand? If our country is divided into many, many small local governments, it would be easiest for the small local governments to select officials based on their own intentions, their own likes and dislikes, and their own standards. As a result, the country is not unified, and the cadres selected in your locality cannot be used in other places. It's not that it can actually be used or not, but that the other party doesn't recognize it. This is the official elected by your prefect. Your prefect is so far away from us, and he is no longer here. Why should we use your prefect's standards instead of ours? They can all use such a standard, so they go their own way.
But I didn't expect that the imperial examination system used unified standards and institutions to complete unified selection. People who come out of the scientific system can be officials anywhere, because it is unified across the country. This is the second standard of the imperial examination system, and it is also a basis for ensuring the unity of our country, China, and the unity of Chinese culture.
A steady stream of managers
Third, if this kind of selection happened several times or dozens of times, it would already be spectacular. But even so, officials will grow old and die of illness, and there will always be a lack of adequate team reserves. What to do? How can I have so much energy to select officials layer by layer with unified standards?
Unexpectedly, the imperial examination system provided examinations every three years, which provided a large number of management talents and maintained an orderly continuation of Chinese culture. This was an important reason. It is not a whim. The court ordered that we have not selected officials for ten years. We will start the selection this year. The next time we have not selected officials for twenty years, our selection this time will be a whim and cause a trend. No! China's imperial examination system, which takes place every three years, provides a continuous supply of officials to the imperial court. This has also ensured that throughout the long history of ancient China, there has been no shortage of administrators.
The fourth reason is that there is so much demand. To achieve this, we must find a very abundant team of people preparing for the exam across the country. Where does this come from? Well, that created a pretty remarkable event as a national force. In ancient China, if a man wanted to take a better path, he had to take the imperial examination. In the imperial examination, regardless of region, family, occupation, rich or poor, all men are eligible. In the Tang Dynasty, even foreigners could take the exam, which turned into a great mobilization of the cultural vitality of the whole people. Almost all men, regardless of age, region or origin, participated in the event in large numbers and for so long. This is the fourth reason why the imperial examination system is great.
The fifth great reason for the imperial examination system is that young men are often the most volatile component of a social group. They are looking for jobs, and they rely on their own vitality to fight, fight, and compete, which will always cause many, many things to happen. However, the imperial examination system has made a large number of young men in China become very diligent preparers and test takers, and many of them have failed repeatedly and have been taking exams their entire lives. This has greatly improved the safety factor of the entire society, and safety is embedded in the cultural atmosphere. If you think about it, all the young men in the country are taking the exam. This is very remarkable. The most volatile factors are eliminated.
Let me interject here. It was very unfair at that time that women could not take the exam, so excellent works like "The Female Consort" appeared. In fact, in life and in real history, due to various considerations, they can only allow men to participate. As a result, didn’t I write about it in "One Hundred Thousand Jinshi"? After many men passed the exam and went to some brothels in the Tang Dynasty to hang out, the prostitutes suddenly asked with a smile: "What is the topic? How did you structure the article? Recommended How about the outline?" The candidates who passed the exam were very proud to promote it, and the prostitute said with a smile: "You should rewrite the first and second paragraphs, if this will be better, otherwise your thinking will not go smoothly." After hearing this, the candidates were shocked. This prostitute's cultural level is much higher than hers!
But, unfortunately, women were not allowed to take the exam at that time. There are many, many interesting stories like this, but this was also a characteristic of the imperial examination system at that time. This characteristic also means that they are not testing literary talents, but management talents. China is such a big country, and management talents need to travel all over the country, from this official to that official, and from that official to that official, so they think that young men are more suitable. This was a basic thinking of the ancient imperial court at that time.
Okay, let’s talk about this today.