Hello everyone, I am Yu Qiuyu, let’s continue the lecture.
Last time, I summed up Lao Tzu's idea of ​​walking on the road, complementing each other, governing by doing nothing, being in harmony with the light, and keeping a low profile until the end. This whole thought was finally summarized into a very high-level thought, called the Supreme Good Like Water. It is not a strategy, it is a supreme good, which is exactly the opposite of conspiracy. This is how we have a new understanding of Lao Tzu. I said at the end of the last time that many famous ideas in the world have helped me in my life, but the one that has helped me the most is Lao Tzu's idea of ​​being as good as water, nourishing all things without fighting, always being in a low position, and smiling quietly at all things. This kind of thinking is the best way of thinking, and it helps me a lot.
Restore the true face of Laozi’s philosophy
In my life, many confusions can be easily solved because of this philosophy. Students often ask me, teacher, why do you ignore the temptation of a high position, ignore all kinds of external provocations, and still insist on writing every day, writing for decades, publishing books one after another, and completely ignoring the noise outside? How can you do this? And he ignores the temptations from the outside, doesn’t join any associations, and doesn’t participate in any conferences. How could this be?
I always give my students a faint smile and then talk about water, Lao Tzu’s water. Students will ask, he said, teacher, since you talked about water, we are reminded of a metaphor, a Chinese idiom, which is called water dripping through a stone. If you use water to drip through the stone, you will win. I said no, there is no such thing as victory here. Because of the idea of ​​water dripping through stone, water does not regard the stone as an enemy or opponent, or even regards the stone as an object at all; passing through the stone, or in other words, passing through the stone, is not an expected design, but a natural arrangement. This natural arrangement is the natural arrangement of the heavenly bodies, and this is the Tao.
We write slowly and talk slowly. It takes decades to penetrate something. This is not our goal, because we do not think that there is a stone in front of us as the object of our struggle. I must slowly use water droplets to penetrate it. If this is the case, my water droplets are too slow. Why don’t I be water? Let’s be strong men and move the stone away. Isn’t this simpler? There is no strategy of hiding for a long time as we imagined, dealing with an opponent, but in the end, our quiet side won. Because according to Laozi's philosophy, there is no victory or defeat, we just nourish all things.
After I said this, everyone will understand that we cannot turn Lao Tzu's great kindness into great hypocrisy and hypocrisy, nor can we turn Lao Tzu's great way into evil. I have seen many, many knowledgeable scholars. When they wrote about Lao Tzu, they all said with a smile that I was a cunning old man, a conspirator, etc. They were all wrong. This is very sorry for me.
Lao Tzu is the originator of the idea of ​​benefiting all things without fighting, and the originator of the idea that the best is as good as water. Therefore, as a scholar and a cultural person, it is an academic responsibility for me, as well as a moral responsibility, to restore Lao Tzu's original intention. Especially since I have been so well influenced by Lao Tzu, this has become a life responsibility. I think my students should do the same. We should understand Lao Tzu's great thinking of the Supreme Good in a positive way.
There are a lot of conspiracy theories in our Chinese culture. In fact, there were not that many conspiracies in Chinese history, at least not as many as what we write in TV dramas now. Not that many, so I often tell my friends in New York and give lectures in New York. Several of my friends in New York said, We also wanted to understand Chinese culture, so we finally watched a few Chinese TV series that had been translated into English. After watching them, we were horrified. Why are there so many conspiracies in China? Every step, every smiling face, and every beautiful palace maid in the palace is a conspirator.
I said, no, there are not that many conspiracies in China. This was imagined by the official historians of the past and later by our lovely contemporary screenwriters. I said, you see, there are indeed many conspiracies written in Chinese history books, but there are only a few conspiracies over hundreds of years. The Chinese people do not know about this conspiracy, because for a long time, the Chinese people were more illiterate, and they could not read or see clearly. I said that I lived in the countryside when I was a child, and later worked in the countryside for a long time. I also worked on the farm during the Cultural Revolution. I know Chinese farmers very well. I told my friends in New York that Chinese farmers really don’t have many conspiracies. Their shortcomings are that they are stingy, stingy, and not hygienic. These are just a few shortcomings. There is little conspiracy. If there is a conspiracy, it may be a little comparison and a little conservative, that's all.
On this issue, when we study Chinese philosophy, we must understand that our chief philosopher, Lao Tzu, is wrong to misrepresent him as a conspirator. He is a person who spreads the highest morals. Water benefits all things without fighting. This is such a thinking. China should popularize this kind of thinking into our lives. Our inaction is not a conspiracy, our opposites and mutual complementation are not a conspiracy, and our keeping a low profile is not a conspiracy. The reason is that I am not a conspiracy. In this way I have explained what I have said more completely.
Zhuangzi's philosophy: Things are not things.
Next, I will undoubtedly talk about Zhuangzi. As for Zhuangzi, in the Taoist view, the leader is Laozi, and Zhuangzi is not regarded as the leader. But in fact, Zhuangzi is by Laozi's side. I don't mean by his side in terms of time, but by his side in philosophy. Being by his side constitutes a relatively complete philosophy called Laozi and Zhuangzi. They are actually separated by a relatively long time, but they form a kind of Lao-Zhuang philosophy. This Lao-Zhuang philosophy is probably inseparable from Zhuangzi when we look at the thinking of their Taoist leaders and the philosophical foundation of their religion.
Zhuangzi, I want to make it shorter, because I made it longer. Anyway, as you all know, I specifically wrote some articles on Zhuangzi in the book "Lectures at Peking University", and I continued to discuss and copy Zhuangzi. Copying Zhuangzi means writing Zhuangzi's things into calligraphy. I wrote "Xiaoyaoyou" in cursive and also translated Zhuangzi. It is not difficult for readers to find this, so I, Zhuangzi, can talk about it more briefly. Because I like Zhuangzi very much, I may have lost the space in the first lecture, and I talked too much as I went on.
Everyone still remembers that I once ranked the literary qualities of the pre-Qin scholars. I put Zhuangzi first, Mencius second, Laozi third, and Confucius fourth. Everyone still has an impression of this. The great Confucius is so great, why did you put it fourth? I also gave the reason, because we are not talking about philosophical thinking and influence, we are talking about literary taste. Zhuangzi, with the unfamiliar eyes of a child, asked many questions instead of answering many questions on a high platform. He asked questions and then gave overall answers in a child's way. This is an artist, and the way he used it was allegory, allegory, allegory. There were many, many allegories. He was a great artist.
I particularly emphasize two concepts in Zhuangzi's philosophy. One concept may be unfamiliar to you, and it is a bit confusing to talk about. Three of the five words in Shaoshao are the same word, called material things. His philosophical concept is called "things are not things". This is a very important concept of Zhuangzi.
What is "things are not things"? The first thing is a verb, which refers to a force that creates things. The person who creates things is the person who creates things. The person who creates matter is not a matter itself. "Things are not things." Do you understand what I mean? The power that makes a thing a thing is not itself a thing. That is to say, we must become creators, and creators are not things. We must seriously understand this concept.
He specifically talked about a concept in "Autumn Waters". If his concept is expressed in our current terms, it means that we should look at things from the standpoint of humans, not from the standpoint of things. What does it mean to look at things from their perspective? That is, my deposit is 3 million, and his deposit is 4 million. If we judge our level based on this, we are judging things based on things. Zhuangzi said no, we must use Tao to judge things and people to judge things. This concept is an important thinking of Zhuangzi.
We're talking about this today.