Hello everyone, I am Yu Qiuyu, let’s continue the lecture.
Last time I defended Taoism, I talked about their third positive function, which is to nourish qi and protect life. He attaches great importance to our philosophy of life, and hopes to find some good vitality things in the macrocosm to supplement the microcosm of our body. Although they have many failed experiments, they also have many successful ones.
Discovery of artemisinin
I have to talk about success stories because all we hear about are failures. As we all know, Professor Tu Youyou, China’s first Nobel Prize winner in medicine, saved the lives of millions of people around the world because of her invention of artemisinin. Professor Tu Youyou said frankly that her attention to artemisinin first came from Ge Hong's works. I mentioned Ge Hong before. In addition to what I said before, he was the first person to systematically organize the Taoist teaching system. He was also a landmark Taoist pharmacist. He discovered artemisinin so early. I think Professor Tu Youyou’s award today is also a round of applause for this explorer of Taoism more than 1,700 years ago. This applause belongs to Taoism and Taoism, at least. At this point, we must give more positive comments to Taoism's contribution to medicine.
As we all know, Ge Hong is a famous alchemist. He advocates "cultivating the body and spirit internally, prolonging life and making diseases more severe". One of his four-word propositions is "cultivating body and spirit internally", and the other four words are "prolonging life and healing diseases". It can extend life and cure diseases. Another contribution he made to Taoism was the writing of an academic work that cannot be underestimated in the history of Chinese culture, called "Baopuzi", which relatively completely established the Taoist theory system of immortals. He believes that immortals are not born, but are cultivated. "Immortality can be obtained, but immortals have no seeds." Anyone can become an immortal. As long as you practice, you will be able to gain access to immortality.
From Ge Hong, we can think of his hometown in Nanjing, a famous Taoist master who was more than 170 years later than him, named Tao Hongjing, Tao, then we all know Tao Yuanming's Tao, Hong, Hong, Jing, scenery Jing who promoted Chinese culture. Tao Hongjing was a figure from the fifth to sixth centuries AD. He wrote many Taoist works of the Shangqing School. He was also a famous doctor. His seven-volume "Compendium of Materia Medica" greatly promoted Chinese medicine. In medicine, even more famous than Tao Hongjing is a famous Taoist doctor named Sun Simiao who was more than 120 years later than Tao Hongjing. He is from Shaanxi. He lived in seclusion in Zhongnan Mountain for a long time, studied Taoism, worked hard to refine elixirs, and wrote famous works in the history of Chinese medicine, such as "Qian Jin Prescription", "Qian Jin Yi Prescription", "Chinese Prescriptions for Maintaining Pillows", "Baosheng Ming", etc., and became a generation of medical masters.
These glorious names can continue to be ranked in the Taoist nursing corridor. Their achievements in medicine are worthy of their counterparts in other parts of the world. It is impossible to count how many lives these names have saved. There is no doubt that they effectively protect the health of the world's most populous nation. Compared with this, there is no need to worry too much about the "medical accidents" that occurred near the alchemy furnace, because they have actually made the Chinese nation the most populous nation, and this is related to Taoist medicine.
To nourish qi and protect life, life comes first. This is the Taoist insistence thousands of years ago. To this day, when we see earthquake and tsunami rescue teams shouting the slogan "life first" over and over again, we always think of a series of medical propositions put forward by Taoism very early on.
Traditional Chinese Medicine and Traditional Chinese Medicine
I need to say a few more words on this issue. Taoist medical scientists form the backbone of China's medical civilization. This is a very important thinking in the medical humanities that we currently advocate. I went to Beijing to attend the Chinese Medical Humanities Conference, and I had a keynote speech. My speech was mainly about Taoist medical thinking, not a general talk. This is not popular in China, and it is not popular in the world, but we must talk about it seriously.
I remember one thing. In 1929, the Executive Yuan of the National Government held a national medical conference and decided to gradually ban traditional Chinese medicine. The executive president at that time was Wang Jingwei. He put forward a point of view. He said that the first thing Japan did during the Meiji Restoration was to ban traditional Chinese medicine, so we should also ban it. He thought this was scientific thinking. However, what he lacks is humanistic thinking. This caused the first conflict between Wang Jingwei and Chiang Kai-shek. In this conflict, Chiang Kai-shek was right. Chiang Kai-shek was the chairman of the National Government at the time, and Wang Jingwei was the executive president. Not long after, in March 1929, when a large number of representatives of traditional Chinese medicine practitioners from Shanghai went to Nanjing to petition, Chiang Kai-shek finally ordered the revocation of the National Health Assembly's decision to ban traditional Chinese medicine.
He used a basic idea and said that Sun Yat-sen said that China’s inherent civilization should be maintained and carried forward. Chiang Kai-shek specifically mentioned Sun Yat-sen's words in his revocation order. Sun Yat-sen said that China's inherent civilization and wisdom should be maintained and carried forward. In this sentence, there is no doubt that it includes China's medical humanities. Chiang Kai-shek was right to lead him to this revocation order.
Think about it, everyone, how did Chinese civilization come to be? The establishment of Chinese civilization is related to Emperor Yan's personal use of medicinal herbs to cure all diseases to resist the biggest enemy of our primitive people - infectious diseases. This is related. Why did so many ethnic groups and groups of people perish? In the early days, some were due to wars, some were due to natural disasters, and some were a type of natural disaster called infectious diseases. Our Emperor Yan personally tasted medicinal herbs and cured all diseases. This is the starting point of our humanities. As for the continuation of humanities, we Taoist medical scientists have created our inherent civilizational wisdom that I mentioned earlier, and the result has been that the Chinese nation has become the most populous nation in the world. That is their humanistic achievement.
What’s more interesting is that we have to face the fact that when the National Medical Congress in 1929 made a resolution to ban traditional Chinese medicine, what Wang Jingwei and others did not know was a very serious fact. The number of traditional Chinese medicine practitioners in China at that time was 830,000, while there were only 6,000 Western medicine practitioners in China. Think about it, everyone, there are 830,000 traditional Chinese medicine practitioners and more than 200,000 drug stores. This is a basic traditional function that protects the health of the Chinese nation. Although Western medicine is very good, it was introduced from abroad based on scientism, not humanism. After it was introduced, it only had 6,000 people. China is so big and has such a large population, six thousand people. What does six thousand people mean? Even many counties at that time could not find even a single Western medicine doctor.
Western medicine, no matter how scientific it is, can face such a humanistic issue of treating a large population of the Chinese nation. Therefore, I think scientism is very good, but we must also maintain the traditional Chinese medical humanities, and the major backbone of medical humanities is traditional Chinese medicine and traditional Chinese medicine, which is based on Taoist medical scientists. We remember Ge Hong, we remember Tao Hongjing, and we remember Sun Simiao. These people are all Taoist medical scientists with very famous names, and we must respect them.
In this case, I talked about the three functions of Taoism that are still valuable to this day: to purify the mind and abstain from killing, to counsel heaven and earth, and to nourish qi and protect life. These three functions, in current terms, are calling for peace, calling for nature, and calling for life. To be pure in mind and abstain from killing is to call for peace; to consult the heaven and earth is to call to nature; to nourish qi and protect life is to call for life. Think about it, everyone, in the contemporary world, what else is more important than these three calls? Calling for peace, calling for nature, calling for life. Let’s think about it. In China, Taoism has been called thousands of times. Should we have new respect for them? As for this, I recall the four words I wrote on the mountain wall of Maoshan Mountain. The road is majestic, which is true. Thank you all.