Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu, and we are just talking about the personality structure of Chinese culture. Personality structure, the first and most important personality structure we have to encounter is called gentleman personality. Well, last time I compared the gentleman personality with other collective personalities in the world, such as gentleman personality, knight personality, warrior personality, and maybe cowboy personality, etc. The irreplaceable thing in China is the gentleman personality.
Reefs and seabed
This involves a Western concept called collective unconsciousness. Even after we enter this personality, no one realizes that we have entered, but you have already entered, so sometimes the unconscious is also called the subconscious. So this should have been proposed by Freud first, but his student and later his opponent Jung, I have talked about it several times. The Chinese translation of Glorious Jung, Passing Pass, the psychologist Jung, made some corrections to Freud's theory. He believed that what is important is not the deep subconscious, but its collective nature, the collective unconscious, which is important.
So the personality I am talking about is also a kind of collective unconsciousness. Everyone has entered a personality structure unconsciously. This is not superficial, and it cannot be reflected by taking a degree exam or memorizing ancient poems. It is a reef, so there is a saying in the international academic community that Freud found the reef under the waves of the sea, and Jung found the seabed under the reef! This metaphor is relatively large and in-depth. It’s a bit difficult, so please listen to it. It was Freud who found the reef beneath the waves of human psychology, and Jung found the seabed beneath the reef.
I use the term that we are all more accustomed to, and it is also a Jungian term. The reason why the so-called collective personality has reached the seabed is that we have found a soul called a hometown, or conversely, we have found a hometown with a soul. Then what we call collective personality, whether it is a gentleman or any collective personality, is not actually formed in our lifetime. So why do we call it the collective subconscious? When it was formed, it did not form slowly bit by bit after we were born.
For a nation, the earliest seeds may have been sown in the age of myth. Every ancient nation has many big myths, which later lead to many small myths. We often describe these big myths and small myths as the dream of a nation, or as prototypes and primitive images, and then combine them into a self-portrait of a nation, which appears repeatedly in collective psychological activities.
Please note that what I am talking about is that the self-portrait of a nation appears repeatedly in our collective psychological activities, so there is also a self-portrait of a nation buried deep in our hearts, even though we cannot feel its existence. Big myths, for example, whether you know it or not, there are actually many myths buried in the heart of each of us Chinese, such as Nuwa filling the sky, Jingwei filling the sea, Kuafu chasing the sun, Chang'e flying to the moon, etc. It is our psychological hometown. Much of our psychology was slowly built up from them as primitive factors, and later it became a very complex anthropological project. Many of our modern scholars don’t know much about this. They always think that our education can change everything in our thoughts. They always think that if we read a few books, our personality structure will be changed, and if we listen to a few stories, our psychology will be reversed. In fact, this is not the case.
The unique personality of Eastern civilization
According to the current scientific thinking, our current scholars often take this issue a bit lightly. I can give you an example here. I have been talking about Jung before. At that time, a great scholar in China went to visit him and Jung. This person was Hu Shi, Mr. Hu Shizhi, whom all of us know. Mr. Hu Shizhi, whom we respect very much, conveyed Western civilization to China relatively early and conveyed many important ideas.
He went to visit Jung, and Jung asked him as soon as they met, what do you think of the "I Ching"? Hu Shizhi was very surprised. How did he know the "Book of Changes"? Hu Shi told him that I don't really believe this. This "Book of Changes" seems to be magic and spells. If you actually think that the "Book of Changes" is magic and spells, have you ever tried to use it to observe our lives? Hu Shi nodded. After nodding, he thought it was magic and a spell. At this time, Jung sighed deeply and kept asking him questions about the "Book of Changes". Moreover, Jung said in the book that contemporary Chinese scholars have gradually moved towards the Western scientific realm and have developed deep doubts about their own traditional culture. Mr. Hu Shizhi basically belongs to the modern group of scholars who Jung said were deeply suspicious of their own culture. He has made great contributions, but his limitations are also very obvious.
On that day, Mr. Hu Shizhi had no idea about the depth of Jung's research on Chinese culture. He didn't know that Jung was sitting in front of him. He had written a 17-page introduction for a translation of the "Book of Changes" by William Translator. In addition, Jung said in this introduction that the Chinese "Book of Changes" and ancient Chinese science are closely connected, and the law of cause and effect is much higher than that of modern Western science. The law of cause and effect only relies on statistics and numerical statistics. If we follow ancient Chinese wisdom, the situation would be completely different. For example, Jung pointed out that things must reverse themselves when they reach their extremes. This basic law is higher than the self-centered personality structure of the West. Because Jung studied personality, he also introduced personality structure. He believed that the "Book of Changes" had changed the Western way of thinking about personality, and China established a different kind of personality. Because Hu Shi was sixteen years younger than Jung, he could not compare with Jung in terms of age or academic seniority.
What Mr. Hu Shizhi said that day was a bit hasty, but his haste had an advantage, which made Jung very anxious. Therefore, whenever he has the opportunity in the future, he will always advise Chinese civilization not to follow Western civilization when he writes a book. He said this repeatedly, so in fact, in Hu Shi's era, some people understood very well that our Eastern civilization has its own unique personality structure and should not completely follow the West. I once saw a speech given by Mr. Sun Yat-sen in Japan. Mr. Sun Yat-sen, he said that Japan has a very strange personality structure, with both Western hegemonic culture and Eastern kingly culture. Then I hope you will make a serious choice about your personality structure. You should be careful whether you choose to be kingly or domineering.
Later, a Japanese entrepreneur gave a speech in Tianjin not long ago. He said that unfortunately, Japan did not follow the path of kingly culture mentioned by Sun Yat-sen, but instead embarked on a bad combination of Western culture and Eastern culture, so it went down the wrong path. This is a saying from a Japanese entrepreneur. But all their discussions are about collective personality. Do you understand? That is, whether we are talking about the discussion between Hu Shizhi and Jung, or whether we are talking about Sun Yat-sen's speech in Japan, these discussions are all about the collective personality of a nation.
I think this issue has been roughly explained on the different importance of a gentleman's personality and other personality structures. Where is the final limit? China regards the gentleman as an ideal personality structure. To be fair, it has absorbed almost all the essence of Chinese culture into itself, into the way of a gentleman. If you understand the way of a gentleman, many elements of Chinese culture can be established. If you don’t have the way of a gentleman, many elements of Chinese culture will be in vain.
So for Confucianism, it has said thousands of words. Confucian scholars have also been in groups in Chinese history, but if they say so many words, in the final analysis, they say one thing, that is, to be a gentleman, this is the most qualified Chinese. Let me say it again, Confucianism has a thousand words, but the last word it talks about is to be a gentleman, which is also the most qualified Chinese person.
Okay, that’s it for today.