Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu.
The fourth weakness of Chinese culture is the issue of the myth of the predecessors. I need to talk about it again. We have some thinking defects that often interfere with our thinking. As long as we are involved in tradition and heritage, our IQ will decrease.
My students all remember that I gave an example many, many years ago. I gave the example of Chongming Island in Shanghai. If you don’t open up, you will think that our island is the best. If you ask people who have never left Chongming Island, what is good about your island? He asked us what kind of flowers we have in winter and what kind of flowers we have in spring. They are similar to other places. But because it did not make a larger space for comparison, it regarded public things as its own characteristics, while its own shortcomings could not be seen. Those who truly understand this Chongming Island must have traveled far away, only to discover the shortcomings and beauty of their own island when they came back.
Then we should be like this when it comes to Chinese culture, and should not become a closed island culture. Our traditions are all good, and you simply cannot stand the contrast of a larger space. This has now become a real big problem.
Heritage and Innovation
A very good friend of mine in Taiwan is called Lin Huaimin. He is an internationally famous dancer. He told me about an incident. He once took a taxi with other artists from his dance troupe. When walking on the streets of Shanghai, he saw the Shikumen house next to him. Two of them said that it would be great if this Shikumen house could be preserved. Unexpectedly, the drivers of the two taxis stopped the car and said, "Come down, you are here for culture, so that you can see it. Do you know what life is like in Shikumen?" Can’t we Shanghai people live a better life? Did you know there's a portable toilet in there? Did you know that there is no gas in it and it is a briquette stove? Did you know that the houses inside are not soundproofed? As a result, Lin Huaimin said that I finally understand that culture should not be at the expense of contemporary ecology. This is a very good point.
Lin Huaiming is a person who specializes in the spread of traditional Chinese oriental culture to all parts of the world, and he has this understanding. Therefore, we must understand that our current understanding of cultural traditions and cultural heritage cannot enter into myths. Here I need to talk about a theoretical issue, which is the word "legacy" in heritage. We should not think of it as a dusty, moldy, or decayed object. We must not. An object can be left behind, and it must be respected while being left behind, which means that it has strong vitality, can travel through time, overcome obstacles, and remain in the world. Therefore, the word "heritage" is not a symbol of obsolescence, but a symbol of strong vitality.
This word is very important. I will say it again. The word "heritage" is not a symbol of oldness and decay, but a symbol of strong vitality. Compared with the things that appeared at the same time, its vitality is tens of millions of times stronger. It is the only one that has been preserved. We must know that this is not an accidental factor, but because of its excellence. So when we are looking for heritage, we are looking for a kind of vitality in it, a force to move forward, rather than a force to retreat.
Cultural heritage gives us confidence that human beings can be proud of history. The root of pride is the original creativity. So please remember that since they can chisel through time and human wisdom, they are the voice of a creator that we must admire. Therefore, the course of cultural heritage should be a course of innovation, nobility, and taste, rather than an old course. It should not be about playing with some old details all day long. This is completely wrong. Cultural heritage itself can also be angry and roar, but I am not like that. You have to find those factors that make it possible to innovate even today, and you must pay attention to this.
Scientific and technological innovation and cultural innovation
Does anyone know? When I taught this class, I had a very important promotional message. I said that Chinese culture is an endless stream of the Yangtze River, not the dead vines, old trees, and dim crows on the riverside. I still stick to this thinking. Because we are constantly flowing, we should focus on tomorrow and the future. In the process of continuous flow, culture can also settle into a river bed. This river bed is personality, our collective personality. We must uphold the strong vitality of Chinese culture and move forward step by step. If we still stay in the place of the myths of our predecessors, the problem will be more serious. This seriously restricts innovative thinking and seriously affects the international image.
Please note that many people say that our technology is already innovating, and it does not matter if our culture is lagging behind. There is a very big myth in China now, that innovation is a matter of science and technology, and culture is about protecting tradition. This is completely wrong. The innovation ability of culture should precede technological innovation. Culture is a collective spiritual consensus. If the spiritual consensus is all in tradition, how can technology innovate? So please remember that when Europe is carrying out modernization reforms, the Renaissance comes first, science and technology comes later, and culture must first innovate. Their so-called revival is not a complete restoration of the culture of ancient Greece and Rome. They are precisely a major innovative project based on ancient discourse. Innovation must be at the forefront, because innovation is a basic aspect of human thinking. If the orientation can be innovative, then the whole society can be stimulated.
If when we talk about culture, we always talk about ancient things, always old things, always conservative things, then how can our cultural thinking be comprehensive? Therefore, the binary structure of "culture is conservative and technology is innovative" cannot last and will definitely be broken. So in this case, if culture needs to be preserved, a lot of things can be preserved, and we have the ability to do so, but the innovative part of culture must grow well. If the older generation of cultural people are no longer capable, then our new generation of cultural people must take innovation as their main business. For those of you who have fallen into the myth of tradition and heritage, fall in for a while, and I hope you can come out soon. I know you are patriotic, but I believe it will easily lead to this result:
At the beginning of the Anti-Japanese War, many people with profound Chinese studies became traitors one after another, which made me feel very troubled; but on the streets of Europe and the United States, I wore a suit and shouted in beautiful English on the street, "My motherland has been invaded, I hope "You can support us, China" are people who were said by everyone back then to be people who forgot about their ancestors and learned to speak English. Many of them were patriots, including the judges of the Tokyo Trial at that time, and many of our diplomats. They were such people. They were very remarkable. And when the traitors were finally tried, many of the people standing on the trial bench were wearing long robes and mandarin jackets and were very well-educated people in the past. So on this issue, the country's glory must be related to the word "innovation", to internationalization and openness, but not to those old stationery and those old rules.
Letting culture retreat and letting science and technology advance is a difficult path to follow. On the other hand, let culture come to the forefront of technology and become a very good force for innovation, encouraging us to move forward, move forward, move forward, innovate, innovate, innovate. Only then will culture have real power. Let’s think about it. There are several cultures that are older than our Chinese culture, such as Babylonian culture and Egyptian culture. If people in Iraq now always use the words of philosophers from the Babylonian era to prove the glory of Iraqi culture; if contemporary Egyptian cultural people always use the prophecies of Pharaoh to explain that Egyptian culture must assume its new status in the contemporary world, wouldn’t we feel a little secretly ridiculous in our hearts?
The glory of the past really cannot replace the value of today and tomorrow, not at all. If we can do a good job in innovation and cultural innovation, then I can say that our Qu Yuan, our Sima Qian, our Li Bai, Du Fu, and our Su Dongpo will all be happy. If we keep talking about them and forget about new cultural innovations, they will definitely be angry.
Thank you all.