Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu. We continue with classes.
Last time I was talking about the sixth reason for the longevity of Chinese culture, which is to downplay competition. When we lower our heads and think about it, I think many friends may think that there is still a lot of competition around us. Well, I want to tell you that strengthening winning and losing, strengthening success and failure is what some people in China do, or it is something that must be done especially in certain historical stages. This mainly appears in scenes such as imperial examinations, officialdom, shopping malls, etc., where the competition is quite fierce.
But in most cases, most Chinese people really don't care much about competition, so no matter what, they will eventually return to the majority. Here I have to tell you about a very troublesome concept called success. I often meet young people on various occasions, or young parents ask me to write a few words for them. What they like most is the concepts of success and God's reward for hard work, and what I write to them is usually kindness, happiness, and health. This is my personal motto.
Why don't you write about success? Some people say that you are very successful. Are you hiding the secret of your success? no. I personally feel that the biggest trouble or sorrow in Chinese society now is that so many people are seeking success and so many people are afraid of losing. This keeps us awake day and night, and we have to pay attention to our surroundings all the time. The main reason why we often feel uneasy is that we look forward to success and don't know when we will succeed. There are two concepts of success here. I am not opposed to the word "success" in a general sense. There are two concepts of success. I hope everyone can separate them.
The first concept is to do things successfully. This is the first concept. The second concept is to compare yourself to others. The success I advocate or the success I nod to is the first success, which is to get things done successfully. Get that thing done and we can congratulate you on the success. If the meaning of success is to compare with others, then this success has a negative meaning, and a kind of poison is quietly buried in it.
There are various psychology of comparing others to others, including comparing others in power and position, comparing others in wealth, and comparing others in reputation. On this issue, the Chinese people sometimes calm down and think about it, and they are more clear-headed than many people in Europe and the United States.
boring official position
For example, regarding official positions, Chinese society may have had a certain kind of admiration for officials for a long time, but there are not many people who really seek official positions and advance step by step. We often notice the frustration of many officials after they lose power overnight. In fact, I have seen this kind of psychology very, very much, so I hope that everyone will stop trying so hard to pursue official positions and try to compare themselves to those around them, their friends, and their opponents. This is unnecessary.
I have seen many retired officials who are worried about their subordinates' changing attitude towards them every day. In fact, I understand better, and I am not changing my face. A subordinate has to work. When a new leader comes and assigns work, can I follow him seriously? Don't let the new leader think that I belong to the old leader. Moreover, if I am always around the old leader who has retired, it will make people feel that there are many small circles in this unit. This is very bad, so they deliberately avoid it. It is not disloyal to you. But after losing power and position, he would be troubled by his subordinates' disloyalty every day, which was indeed very distressing.
Power and position are not a very good thing, I must advise everyone on this. It involves a lot of commitment and a lot of sacrifice, which moved us very much. But overall, it's not very important. I met a very senior leader who was retired, and luckily he liked my book, so we had a conversation.
He told me that he has been writing his memoirs every day for three years. He has been writing his memoirs for three years after retirement. His wife told me that he was writing his memoirs while flipping through my book. I seriously advised him, I said since you are my reader, I have to tell you something, can you please stop writing, don’t write such a memoir. You go exercise, you go engage in art, you go write calligraphy, instead of writing a memoir like this.
What's the reason? I say the program we paid for, the results were good, but the program itself was boring. What can you write in a memoir? You have never fought in a war, you have not participated in thrilling things, you have been welcomed and sent away. When this project was completed, a joint venture could be negotiated there, and after writing these things, I said something that he did not accept very well, but he quickly accepted it. I said that to be fair, your son and grandson would not read such a memoir. So I want to make a point from this, that is, official positions are relatively boring as a whole, and they are not worth exaggerating or remembering.
wealth and fame
The same goes for wealth. Chinese people know very well that it has become the object of many robberies, covetations, and expectations. And if you look at many people with great wealth, they are still relatively young, but if we look at the very wealthy people in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and many other places, they have been rich for a long time, and almost everyone has encountered family disputes over the division of wealth. Some are reported by the media, and some are not reported, but I know that the hatred between flesh and blood buried here is unparalleled. In fact, the hatred between flesh and blood has been vaguely seen when these rich people are not very old. The eldest son who whispers whispers in his ear, the younger son who shows all kinds of hope in front of me, etc. He already knows that a very bad family division will appear behind him, and this is indeed the case.
As for reputation, this is even more true. I wrote an article specifically about fame. How many people in the world later got the fame they longed for. However, if there is a very close connection between fame and its reality, most of them will be relatively mediocre people, and they will not even have the motivation to attack. Therefore, if the reputation is very good, after his incident is over and his life is over, the reputation will soon disappear. Therefore, many people like to write on their tombstones such as "deputy department level cadre so-and-so", followed by "this unit does not have a department level" in parentheses. This is ridiculous. It's totally unnecessary for reputation to end up on a tombstone or in a eulogy. As for the various reputations in the political and cultural circles, they were quickly forgotten by everyone due to the ups and downs.
You see, several characteristics like these show that success is very worthless when comparing yourself to others. So I believe that for those of us who are listening to the lecture today, I am not trying to explain psychology. I am just talking about the nature of Chinese culture. What I mean by seeing through has been seen through in Chinese culture and history. Here I would like to talk about a few ancient Chinese classics. Almost all Chinese people know this famous saying, so it has gradually become a deep deposit in our hearts.
For example, Lao Tzu said, "Misfortunes are where blessings depend, and blessings are where misfortunes lie." This means that our misfortunes and blessings are closely dependent on each other. Lao Tzu also said that there is no greater disaster than not being satisfied. As long as you compete, the greatest disaster awaits you. The competition I'm talking about is the kind of competition that involves comparing others to others, rather than the kind of competition that involves getting things done successfully. Zhuangzi said that safety and danger come to each other, and misfortunes and blessings come to each other. Han Feizi said that misfortune and blessing belong to the same family, benefit and harm are neighbors. The great poet Bai Juyi said that good fortune and misfortune are unpredictable, and most of them retire early like a prophet.
There are many such examples, which proves that China's first-class philosophers, thinkers, literati, and poets have reached consensus on this issue. I have hardly seen an example in ancient Chinese philosophy and aesthetics papers that encourages everyone to compare others to achieve competitive success, and all the highest discourse systems are tightly implemented on the basic concept of "downplaying competition." So I can say with some confidence that this is the main focus of thinking in Chinese culture.
There are some less important ideological blocks that exist, such as the "pursuing winning or losing, success or failure" that I mentioned, but its real cultural focus is on downplaying competition. I will talk about this issue next time.