Yesterday we talked about Fu Jian's determination to fight for a cultural man and a Buddhist philosopher in a long-distance war. He sent General Lu Guang as the commander of this expedition to snatch people. Finally in 382 AD, Lu Guang won the war and captured Kumarajiva. After grabbing it, I had to send it back to Chang'an, but the journey was indeed too far. I walked halfway before reaching Liangzhou, which is now Wuwei, Gansu.
When he arrived in Liangzhou, Lu Guang heard the shocking news that the monarch Fu Jian who sent him out to rob people had resigned. Fu Jian was first defeated in the famous Battle of Feishui, and then was killed by the tribesmen. In this case, why should we go back to Chang'an? Just stay in Liangzhou. Anyway, with the army, everything can be settled. He, Lu Guang, became the ruler of Liangzhou.
So what should he do with Kumarajiva who was snatched away by him? Lu Guang didn't know much about his knowledge, but he knew that this was a treasure that everyone was fighting for and must be carefully guarded. In this way, Kumarajiva lived in Liangzhou for seventeen years under strict guard.
Then I will introduce a few words about Kumarajiva. Jiu is the "jiu" of Turtle Dove, Mo is the "Mo" of skyscraper, Luo is the "Luo" of Thoreau, Shi is the "Shi" of Shichahai in Beijing, Kumarajiva. His father is Indian, and his mother, as mentioned earlier, is the sister of King Kucha. He is the highest-ranking Buddhist scholar in Qiuci and even in the entire Western Region. Such a great scholar has stayed in Liangzhou for seventeen years. What can he do? We still need to verify this, but judging from various information, in addition to continuing to study Buddhism intensively, he also made great efforts in learning Chinese.
Coincidentally, the soldiers Lu Guang sent to guard him came from many places in China. Kumarajiva learned many dialects of Chinese by the way. Seventeen years have made him a linguist proficient in Chinese, which played a great role in his later management of translation work in Chang'an. He is a great translator as famous as Xuanzang in the Tang Dynasty in the history of Chinese culture. Many of Xuanzang's translations still use his classic translation method. For example, we all know the famous sentence in the Heart Sutra, "Form is emptiness, emptiness is form." The earliest translation was Kumarajiva's. The translation is accurate and concise, and it is difficult to change.
Liangzhou style
Speaking of him going to Chang'an to take charge of the translation work, it was another cultural war. It turned out that Yao Xing, the new monarch of the Later Qin Dynasty, suddenly thought that his predecessor had a rare treasure left in Liangzhou, so he made up his mind to snatch it back. How could Liangzhou be willing to let it go? Therefore, Yao Xing actually sent 100,000 troops to attack Liangzhou. As a result, in 401 AD, Kumarajiva was finally snatched by Yao Xing and came to Chang'an.
It was also a fight starting from Chang'an. Kumarajiva was still very young for the first time, but why was the road to this fight so long? When he really arrived in Chang'an, he was already 58 years old. You see, in order to compete for a cultural person, a philosopher, and a translator, huge troops are sent out time and time again to compete, and the distance to compete is very long. Although this kind of China is a bit absurd, it makes me feel extremely proud. This kind of China must be pregnant with a great era.
Okay, let's look back at Liangzhou where Kumarajiva was robbed. Kumarajiva was hidden in Liangzhou by the robbers, but was finally discovered and snatched away. The horseshoes of decades ago can easily cost tens or hundreds of thousands. One moment, a cultural ambassador came, and the next moment, a cultural master left. Liangzhou is not sad at all about this. Because culture is not like wealth and power, which is snatched away as soon as it is said to be snatched away. Culture has roots, vitality, and veins, and the seeds are sown as long as it comes. A cultural master has been taken away, but the cultural atmosphere that has been formed here cannot be taken away. Liangzhou, without Kumarajiva, is still a cultural center.
Therefore, 38 years after Kumarajiva was robbed, another mighty army came to rob the culture. That was the army of the Northern Wei Dynasty that I mentioned earlier. They had a huge appetite and robbed 30,000 people in one go. Liangzhou should be empty now, right? Neither. Just 80 years after 30,000 people were robbed, the 14-volume "Biography of Eminent Monks" edited by Hui Xiao, a monk born in Shangyu, Zhejiang, my hometown, contained half of the lists of eminent monks from Liangzhou. Of course, "Liangzhou was stolen" has become more popular in various places.
The first is the Yungang Grottoes in Datong, especially the Tanyao Five Grottoes in the center, which have long become a world-class cultural landscape. Then came the Longmen Grottoes in Luoyang, and finally settled in Chang'an. It can be said that almost the entire Yellow River Basin was penetrated by Liangzhou. Archaeologist Mr. Su Bai once described this phenomenon as the "Liangzhou model". When I was lecturing at Peking University, I changed it to "Liangzhou Style" because the model was a bit limited, but it actually changed a lot. Because of its huge contribution to culture, Liangzhou style has received an incredible reward, which is the emergence of a collective world-class ceremony, which is unique among all regional cultures.
an ancient world fair
What I mean is that more than a hundred years after I told the above stories, Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty held a grand ancient world exposition in Liangzhou. It turns out that after Emperor Sui Yang came to the throne in the early seventh century AD, he accepted Pei Ju's suggestion to further expand trade routes in the Western Regions. He made the Hexi Corridor and Liangzhou clearly come into the view of the government and the public.
Pei Ju, a native of Shanxi, is the "torch" of the torch. He has great vision. In my opinion, he was a rare macroeconomist at that time. He opposed all kinds of trade protectionism with the concept of mutual trade, and compiled the "Illustration of the Western Regions" to mark the three routes of the Silk Road. Therefore, he was a key figure in re-opening international channels.
Under Pei Ju's instigation, Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty actually went to Zhangye, adjacent to Wuwei in the Hexi Corridor, to hold a grand international trade alliance in 609 AD. 27 countries from the Western Regions participated. Please remember that there were as many as 27 countries.
Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty ordered that the maids from Wuwei and Zhangye must dress up to attend. In addition to a large number of commodities, music and dance from Liangzhou, various arts from the Western Regions, and artists from the Central Plains were gathered there. The number of participants formed a battle array that stretched for dozens of miles. Envoys and merchants from various countries in the Western Regions were there, and they were once again shocked by the magnificence of Chinese culture. This is a truly ancient world's fair. At first glance, it seems to focus on trade, but in fact it is the restart of all-round exchanges between the Central Plains Dynasty and the countries in the Western Regions. Therefore, this shows the world identity of Chinese culture in the most distinctive and solemn way.
In Chinese history, Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty was the only monarch from the Central Plains who visited the Hexi Corridor in person. His feat of re-opening the Silk Road personally reminded me of him digging the Grand Canal. A horizontal corridor and a vertical canal are really the two lifebloods of Chinese civilization. He has only been in office for 14 years, but it is not easy to accurately grasp these two lifelines.
Many history books have a derogatory connotation of him because he was too eager for success and extravagant, but I have always been quite positive about his big ideas. As soon as Emperor Yang of Sui Dynasty died, the Tang Dynasty was established. There are many topics about the Tang Dynasty, but the grand Liangzhou style has obviously been retained. Here I might as well read two "Liangzhou Ci" that everyone is familiar with to illustrate the status and charm of Liangzhou in Tang poetry. One is by Wang Zhihuan:
Far up the Yellow River among the white clouds, there is an isolated city called Wanren Mountain. Why should the Qiang flute blame the willows? The spring breeze does not pass through Yumen Pass.
Everyone knows another song, also called "Liangzhou Ci", written by Wang Han:
The luminous cup of grape wine reminds you immediately if you want to drink Pipa. Don't laugh when you are lying drunk on the battlefield. How many people have fought in ancient times.
This bold and optimistic warrior sentiment is the main theme of Tang culture. In the hearts of so many Tang Dynasty poets, they could not let go of Liangzhou. When I was teaching a course on the history of Chinese culture at Peking University, a female student asked me to talk more about Liangzhou culture because she had a good impression of the word "liang". When I heard her ask, she told a long story, which surprised the students because they couldn't hear it in ordinary courses. Several students had read my memory literature "A Brief History of My Family" and asked jokingly, did this have something to do with my identity as a descendant of Liangzhou? This topic is interesting, I'd like to say a few words in passing.
Cultural genes that transcend blood ties
Three years ago, a place in Jiangsu asked me to write the words "Yuque Temple" because the temple they built had a very novel format and many parts were transparent. I liked it, so I wrote the inscription. This "que" is the word "que" in "I don't know the palace in the sky, what year is it today?" Yu Que was a garrison of the Yuan Dynasty in the 14th century AD, guarding Anqing City. In 1358, Anqing city was captured by Chen Youliang. He committed suicide immediately, and his wife and children all threw themselves into a well. This was not only respected by his enemy Chen Youliang, but also praised by Zhu Yuanzhang. His biography was written by Song Lian. As soon as Song Lian started writing, he immediately wrote that he was from Liangzhou and of the Dangxiang clan.
I remember many years ago, an expert on Xixia history in Ningxia told me that the Dangxiang people were establishing the Xixia Dynasty and were eventually destroyed by Genghis Khan. Some of them joined Genghis Khan's Mongolian troops. Later, when the Mongols failed, many people changed their surname from Temu to Yu, and many of them went to Zhejiang. Yu Que also became Yuanmeng's general as a party member, but his surname seems to have been there originally and was not temporarily changed.
Over the years, I have received a large number of papers and rosters many times. Most of the authors' surnames are Yu, and they all come from the Temu clan and claim to be so. It seems that not only does surname change exist, but it is also quite large. It can be inferred from this that I am most likely a descendant of the Dangxiang people whose ancestral home is Wuwei.
Xianbei entered Mongolia from Xixia. After the Mongolian defeat, he changed his surname and entered Jiangsu and Zhejiang. But I once said jokingly that among our surnames, those who are close to the desert, fearless of long distances, energetic, and persevering, most likely have the bloodline to fight on the battlefield in the northwest. At least I have such characteristics. Nowadays, DNA genetic testing technology is advancing by leaps and bounds. Sooner or later, there will be clearer answers to the question of the ancestry of ancestors and descendants.
But as a cultural person, I value a cultural gene that transcends blood ties. Liangzhou obviously has a mysterious spiritual connection with me. Now we know that even genes can be modified, so no matter what, my genes have been modified by Liangzhou culture.
What makes me happy is that many people in Wuwei City now regard me as their hometown person. When I went there, they specially arranged a ceremony for me to lay flowers to the statue of Yu Que, and invited me to write an inscription for the name of the Liangzhou Cultural Research Institute. They even set up a study room for me in the institute. After visiting various historical sites, I am very grateful to them for the good repair of Kumarajiva Temple. I just have a little objection to the statue of Kumarajiva, that is, it looks too much like an ordinary Han monk.
Please think about it, his father is Indian and his mother is the sister of the King of Kucha. How many sculptors will be interested in his appearance. If he is too Han Chinese, it will conceal his identity as a world-class in-depth communicator of international culture and Chinese culture. In comparison, the standing statue of Tan Yao sculpted by Mr. Wu Weishan in the Yungang Grottoes in Shanxi is much better.
In addition, I hope Wuwei can become a popular choice for modern travelers. The reason is that there are so many exciting ancient stories that enhance culture that I just told. In ancient times, it was a big station in a big passage, so modern transportation should also be smoother.