Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu.
Yesterday we talked about the second aspect of Song Dynasty culture, which is called two high-ranking cultural officials: Wang Anshi and Sima Guang. Everyone must have discovered that these two people have done a thrilling and top-notch work on the gentleman personality of Chinese culture. Administratively they failed, but culturally they succeeded
,
The greatest success is that they pushed cultural personality into history and shocked history.
Think about it, everyone. Last time I talked about Su Dongpo, a cultural all-rounder in the Song Dynasty, plus these two high-ranking cultural officials: Wang Anshi and Sima Guang. With just these three people, the culture of the Song Dynasty is already very vibrant, but we are definitely not done yet, because there are still some very wonderful personality models.
As I mentioned earlier, Wang Anshi and Sima Guang were able to reach the pinnacle of state administration because of a special civil service system in the Song Dynasty. This civil service system certainly excites us, but it also brings great disadvantages. One of them is to seriously weaken the military strength. Coupled with the increasing corruption of the court and the high-pressure Song Dynasty, some words that were least wanted to be heard often came to the ears of the government and the public.
What words? For example: being attacked, defeated, captured, and begging to surrender have become frequently used words in the history of the Song Dynasty. Later, even the two emperors Song Huizong and Song Qinzong became prisoners, and had to move the capital to Lin'an and changed it to the Southern Song Dynasty. After the name was changed to the Southern Song Dynasty, there were still many crises.
Many books have written about this history, so I won’t repeat it. I just want to tell you that amidst the misery of military defeats, Chinese culture has chosen heroism, and the heroic land is more heroic than the soldiers.
Moreover, this kind of cultural heroism is not a slogan or a bluff, but it is melted into a superb aesthetic personality and becomes real literature. So the next part of our lecture will be "Three War Poets". Let’s review: a cultural all-rounder, two high-ranking cultural officials, and three war-torn poets.
The first war poet I am going to talk about will definitely surprise everyone. Because at first glance
,
Her works have almost no sword spirit, but are full of infinite elegance.
,
She is the poetess Li Qingzhao.
How could Li Qingzhao become a war poet? Because she expresses the extreme difference between peace and war more clearly than anyone else, and writes about the psychological feelings of the most elegant oriental woman when her family is destroyed, her family is destroyed, and she is fleeing from chaos. An indescribable sadness has become a spiritual lever that can stir up the great suffering and sorrow of a generation. This is also a pride of Song Dynasty literature. In the rainy evenings during the war, China's first female poet quietly stood up.
absurd escape
Speaking of Li Qingzhao, at the beginning, we must connect it with the two senior cultural officials I mentioned earlier, because after Sima Guang denied Wang Anshi's reforms, and later the two died one after another, a complicated party struggle formed. In this party struggle, Sima Guang was classified as a so-called Yuanyou party member, which was rejected by the new court. Li Qingzhao's father, Li Gefei, was also implicated in this list and was dismissed from office and exiled.
This happened when Li Qingzhao was still very young. This incident alone is already very sad, but what is even sadder is that the person handling this case is Zhao Tingzhi, the father of her newlywed husband Zhao Mingcheng, and the newlyweds have a very good relationship.
Li Qingzhao once wrote a letter to his father-in-law Zhao Tingzhi, hoping that he would take into account the face of his son and daughter-in-law's family. However, he did not expect that his father-in-law Zhao Ting would also be attacked by the court later. This chilling political atmosphere shows that the Northern Song Dynasty was already in a quagmire of mutual struggle. Under this situation, the Northern Song Dynasty obviously no longer had the power to deal with the surrounding hostile forces, let alone confront the Jin Kingdom in the north.
Li Qingzhao and her husband Zhao Mingcheng were unable to defend themselves against the heavy pressure on their father's reputation, so they had no choice but to return to their hometown of Qizhou, where they lived a quiet and elegant life for more than ten years. What we often read about the two of them writing poetry and enjoying antiques together in their lives is actually related to these more than ten years.
Zhao Mingcheng, Li Qingzhao's husband, was a well-known connoisseur, but he was in poor health and soon fell seriously ill. During his serious illness, a visitor from the north brought a stone pot to him for inspection. Zhao Mingcheng unfortunately passed away shortly after the inspection.
Immediately after his death, rumors arose that he dedicated a jade pot to the Kingdom of Jin in the north until his death. Because there was a fierce war between the Song and Jin Dynasties at that time, this rumor touched upon the so-called integrity issue that Chinese intellectuals like to talk about most, and extended from the integrity issue to the national justice of whether it was treason. In fact, it was an extremely fragile logic in troubled times.
But Li Qingzhao couldn't sit still. It was okay to frame himself, but he actually framed her husband who had just passed away. How could he tolerate this? She knew very well that this was the worst little rumor. Because the pot was brought by a northerner, he thought it was a jade pot. When Zhao Mingcheng saw it was a stone pot, the man took it back. And that person is only from the north, so why is he related to politics?
But in the face of the fierce public opinion, Li Qingzhao knew that he could not explain clearly. Even if Zhao Mingcheng was still alive, he could not explain clearly. This is the characteristic of rumors, especially political rumors.
Li Qingzhao is determined to use all her strength to clear her beloved late husband's reputation, but she doesn't know how to clear it. After much deliberation, our most honest female poet came up with the clumsiest method, which was to take all the antique cultural relics that the couple had collected over the years and follow the Emperor Zhao Gao of the Song Dynasty. Zhao Gao happened to be chased by the Jin soldiers at the time, so he fled with him.
She used such a clumsy way to illustrate a simple truth:
The Song Dynasty was already on the run, and I was willing to follow the imperial court with all my antiques and cultural relics, and I was even willing to dedicate them all to the imperial court. So why did my husband have second thoughts before the Song Dynasty fled? How could you give a pot to the Kingdom of Jin?
She established such a reluctant logic, a logic that is very touching. There were a lot of antiques and cultural relics, and the journey was very difficult. Loading and unloading were very hard. Our poor Li Qingzhao had to work hard every day to escort them and chase the imperial court's escape route.
In fact, the panicked court had no idea that such a woman, such a pile of goods, and such painstaking efforts were following behind her, let alone that she was going to use this method to clear her family's reputation and her husband's reputation.
This is the long journey of Li Qingzhao's life: fleeing, fleeing, fleeing, holding on to her husband's reputation and all his treasures, forever landing in the cracks of war. Her lyrics are just a gentle breath on the long journey, so she became a real war poet.
When Emperor Gaozong of the Song Dynasty fled along the southeastern coast, he once lived in panic on a sea ship, with poor Li Qingzhao following far behind. It went from today's Shaoxing to today's Ningbo, then passed through Fenghua and Taizhou to the sea, and then returned to Shaoxing through Wenzhou. Song Gaozong's journey was very embarrassing, but Li Qingzhao's journey was very absurd.
Why would she make such a ridiculous choice? I think there may be only one answer: because she is a poet, and a single female poet.
miserable old age
Finally, thank God, Li Qingzhao, who was extremely tired, found a relative with a clear mind on the road. The relative strongly advised her to end this meaningless wandering immediately. In fact, Li Qingzhao really couldn't walk anymore. She listened to this relative's words, but after taking stock of the cultural relics she brought with her, she had lost most of them along the way. At this time, the female poet Li Qingzhao was already nearly 10 years old
50
, which was considered a very old age at the time, and she finally wanted to stop.
She suddenly discovered that she used to travel every day not only to catch up with the court, but also to escape from overall thinking. Now that there is no need to catch up, you can just think about it carefully. When she thought about it, she couldn't help but shake her head and sigh. Since her youth, her father's reputation, her father-in-law's reputation, and her husband's reputation have been tormenting her for most of her life. Now that I think about it, how significant is it?
The so-called reputation only appears in the minds of others, but where are those others now? Do they remember? Moreover, all these reputations are related to the imperial court. Now that even the imperial court cannot find its own reputation, how can we distinguish right from wrong with the imperial court? After much thought, Li Qingzhao decided to bid farewell to the past and live a stable life.
In the Song Dynasty, if such a lonely woman wanted to live a relatively stable life, she should find a home, an ordinary home.
At that time, there happened to be an army financial officer who had been proposing to me. She thought she was not too young, so she agreed. Of course she knew that at that time, an upper-class woman who came from an official family and had a deep relationship with her deceased husband, who was nearly fifty years old, would definitely be criticized and ridiculed by the society if she remarried. But Li Qingzhao now takes reputation very lightly and decides to go his own way.
At this juncture, she showed a kind of courage that was as desperate as breaking the boat. If things only ended there, that would be fine. Li Qingzhao could have closed the door and lived an ordinary and stable life with her new husband. But I never expected that this husband turned out to be a delinquent.
With the eyes of a profiteer, he set his sights on the few antique cultural relics that Li Qingzhao had left during his escape. The so-called marriage was just a means of fraud. When he got the antique cultural relics, he immediately punched and kicked Li Qingzhao and abused him in every possible way. The name of this profiteer is Zhang Ruzhou. You are the "female" with a female on the edge of the water at three o'clock, and Zhou is the "boat" of Zhoushan.
Li Qingzhao, who was really pitiful to the extreme, would not reveal his family scandal to the outside world as long as there was still a little room for tolerance. But after all, she knows the preciousness of life, and knows that kindness and nobility should not be buried in evil. So just three months after getting married, she appealed to the government for divorce.
Li Qingzhao knew that there was a strange law in the Song Dynasty. If a wife sued her husband, even if the husband was really guilty, the wife would be imprisoned by the government for a while, but Li Qingzhao would rather be imprisoned than get a divorce. As a result, the divorce was finalized, Zhang Ruzhou was questioned, and Li Qingzhao was imprisoned. Fortunately, with the help of relatives, she was not imprisoned for too long.
Later, in order to protect Li Qingzhao's reputation, many scholars denied that Li Qingzhao had ever remarried and divorced. But this is a kind of good intention, which can hardly cover up the records we have seen of people like Li Xinchuan, Wang Zuo, Hu Zai and Zhao Gongwu. And we can also read a letter written by Li Qingzhao to relatives, in which she also mentioned this matter. In the letter, she worried that remarriage and divorce would be ridiculed in future generations. She hoped that wise men could prevent others from slandering her, so she quietly entered old age.
So now, we can truly understand "Slow Voice" which she wrote in her later years. So let’s read it again:
Searching and searching, deserted and miserable. It is most difficult to breathe when it is warm and then cold. How can three cups and two glasses of light wine defeat him, who comes late and is in a hurry? The wild geese are passing by, and I am sad, but it is an old acquaintance.
The yellow flowers are piled up all over the ground, and they are haggard and damaged. Who is worthy of picking them now? Watching the window, how can you be alone in darkness? The phoenix trees are covered with drizzle, and it rains bit by bit at dusk. This time, how could there be such a thing as "sorrow"!
Can you finally understand it now?
Li Qingzhao’s experience may not be clear to many people. The reason why I said it more carefully before is because I want to express several cultural characteristics.
The first cultural characteristic is: some rumors in the world may seem like dark clouds, but they are actually all fleeting smoke and dust. Therefore, do not worry about what you say. The ultimate reputation of culture lies in its works.
The second cultural characteristic is: the greatest sorrow must be measured in the works so that more readers can feel it. Once the emotions are exaggerated, it will be impossible to enter the door of literature.
The third literary characteristic is: even in chaos and frustration, it can refine first-class aesthetic models and pass them on to eternity.
This is Li Qingzhao’s experience, which brings us three enlightenments on cultural characteristics.