Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu.
Last time, I analyzed the ecological reasons why Chinese culture emphasizes unity based on the discussion of German sociologist Max Weber. He started from the perspective of two major rivers flowing into more than a dozen provinces. He believed that if these dozen provinces did not have the leadership of a unified government, they could harm any other provinces upstream and downstream at will. He used this as the reason why China must be unified. As long as these two rivers are still flowing and as long as these two rivers are China's ecological foundation, the unified thinking of Chinese culture will not be cut off. This is very good.
So today I want to repeat what I have said before. One of the very important things Qin Shihuang and others did was that they used the important experiment of unifying the script very early to tell everyone that unification can be achieved. This is a very remarkable thing.
pursue unity
Think about it, everyone, China is so big, has so many dialects, the population is so dense, and the circulation is so fast. It is simply unimaginable that the writing system is unified. It is difficult for any country in the world to achieve this at an early stage, because the various means of governance were not yet available at that time, but they actually achieved it. Do you know what value this has for the continuation of Chinese culture? At first glance, "unification" sounds like it is very important to our country, China. In fact, strictly speaking, it is very important to culture and Chinese culture.
Let me give you the most popular example. If our writing is not unified, then let’s imagine that if our writing is not unified, there will definitely be self-annihilation of culture. How could you say that? Let me give you an example. If one year Shanxi and Shandong go to war and Shanxi defeats Shandong, they will do one thing after the defeat. Let the Shandong people stop using Shandong characters and switch to Shanxi characters. Any winner will do this.
However, this thing is easy to succeed. Why? Because from the perspective of world history, it is very convenient to change the writing of a place. As long as the school of the literate person is changed, as long as the literate person is driven away, if the literate person is not driven away, after the literate person dies of old age, the new generation will no longer know these words, and these words will become a sacred book. We can see this situation in Egypt and other places.
However, Shandong uses Shanxi's characters. The question is, won't Shanxi be defeated by other provinces? Well, another identity came, Henan defeated Shanxi, and the words of Henan were left. Does anyone know? The result is that when the characters of Shandong disappear, the history of Shandong also disappears. When the characters of Shanxi disappear, the history of Shanxi also disappears. When the characters of Henan disappear, the history of Henan also disappears. If the writing is not unified, then each writing will want to be superior to others. When other people's writing is eliminated, the history of Chinese culture will be wiped out piece by piece.
The unified text becomes a common code, a common code shared by everyone. Even if this province defeats that province, it cannot eliminate its writing. It is possible that it can confiscate certain historical records. But if the writing is not eliminated, the cultural genes will not be eliminated, all memories will not be eliminated, and many hidden historical materials can be resurrected. Therefore, in a country like China where there are still many civil wars, the unification of writing plays a great role in the spread of culture.
We now have an idiom called Tongwen Tongzong. It is very important to note that the same text is placed before the same sect. It is this same text and unified text that ensures the unity of our psychology and culture. Otherwise, the same sect is useless. Even though you also have black hair, black eyes, and yellow skin, when the cultures are different, or when the cultures of several generations are different, blood relations really cannot be transformed into culture. A very important reason why Chinese culture is immortal is that a unified script makes it a cultural base that is difficult to destroy. This culture has continued.
This is true for words, and it is also true for other aspects. I have said many things like this. In Chinese history, unification has brought many problems to Chinese culture, but I have always given a very positive evaluation to the unification of words and culture, because this is a great preservation, a very positive, national, and essence continuation, so we have no reason to have any wrong ideas in this regard.
This unification or this unification, first of all, is our pursuit of unified thinking, which undoubtedly continues our Chinese culture. I must say something like this: In China's thousands of years of history, there have been many people who pursued unification, and many people who have pursued division.
We must understand that whether we are those who pursue unity or those who pursue division, there are many extremely smart and capable politicians and military strategists on both sides. They are all very good in terms of personal intelligence, and the reasons are very good. But if we compare them, we will find that those who advocate unification tend to be more far-sighted and therefore more popular. Because of their atmosphere, they hold the main line and control the overall situation. They are the big ones between unification and division.
Let me say it again, between unity and division, there are big ones and small ones, great ways and small wisdoms. What we pursue is greatness and great wisdom, and the pursuit of unity, in my opinion, is great truth and great wisdom. It is precisely because of these people that China has moved from division to unity time and time again, and it is precisely because of them that most Chinese people have developed their psychological adaptation as citizens of a great country on the basis of culture. It is this kind of psychological adaptation that guides the steps of history and keeps China from sinking in the quagmire of division.
keep order
Can everyone understand? The pursuit of unity is the third reason for the continuation of Chinese culture. Let’s talk about the fourth reason. The fourth reason is that following our logic, unification may cause a drawback. Unification is unified, but it is very scattered. We call it a loose sand. A loose sand cannot be said to have overall vitality. There are countries like this in the world that are ruled lightly and scatteredly, but the rule is ineffective, the country makes little progress, production always lags behind, and civilization always stays on the primitive basis. We have seen many such countries, and "unification" is not necessarily the source of strength.
Therefore, on this issue, there is a strong desire to establish an order, and this desire is a very clever cultural choice of the ancient Chinese. In very early times, the ancients felt that what this country needed most was order. So in very distant ancient times, when the Babylonians were studying astronomy and mathematics, when the Egyptians were carving a series of scenes of life and death in tomb passages, and when the Indians were doing ascetic practices in batches in mountain caves, what were the Chinese doing? The Chinese people spend a lot of energy rehearsing the etiquette to maintain order. The purpose of etiquette is to maintain order.
Confucius traveled for most of his life, and his main purpose was to restore Zhou rituals and rebuild the social order of the Western Zhou Dynasty. In fact, he had more ideas than the social order of the Western Zhou Dynasty. This was a very important idea of ​​his. So not long ago, there was a place where historical sites were restored, which is an important place of civilization for us. There is a road called the Avenue. I suggest changing it to Zhouli Avenue, because this is the dream of Confucius and it is also a very important feature of our Chinese culture. It is the pursuit of everything from the court to the family, from the market to the street, everything is in order and everyone is in compliance.
Which civilization doesn’t yearn for order? But among all the masters of civilization, only the Chinese regard order as the first priority of governance. Therefore, many other civilizations have collapsed due to disorder. Only China has made order the latitude and longitude of society.
In ancient China, order was designed by rulers and strictly managed. It became a ritual hierarchy and formed a semi-mandatory overall structure in society. With order, both society and people have front, back, left, right, superior and inferior, which not only maintains the full effectiveness of rule, but also avoids the chaos and mutual harm caused by disorder.
The order I am talking about will of course also produce many negative effects. For example, there is a kind of unfreedom that requires us to always look around, and there is also a reluctance that we always need to helplessly obey the authority. We even have an uncomfortable feeling of having to curl up in a lot of rules. Therefore, people who have lived in an orderly society for a long time often have to distinguish what is the old order, what is the new order, what is the positive order, and what is the negative order, and work hard to eliminate the old and establish the new.
But what happens to disorder? I want to tell my classmates about this. Our generation has been living in the excitement of destroying the old order and establishing a new one. We think about how to establish a new order every day, how to establish the new and the old, and how to remove the old and replace the old. When we were young, this was all we thought about.
As Chinese wise men, no one has ever thought about one thing, what will disorder be like? Never thought about it. At least that's the case for me. What I think about in my mind is the new order and the old order, and I don't think about disorder. So I will tell you in the next class how much damage disorder will bring to civilization.
Thanks.