Hello everyone. Yesterday I talked about the Northern Wei Dynasty represented by Emperor Xiaowen. In addition to improving its own culture, it also broadened the vitality of Han culture. I can use a metaphor to illustrate this issue.
A couple of bums wander into a big city and quickly become city dwellers, which is nice, but a small thing. But if they change the aura and vision of the city quickly, that's a big deal. The Xianbei people are a group of homeless people who broke into big cities and changed them.
Following this metaphor, we come to a conclusion: it is not difficult for a minority to accept Han culture, but it would be too difficult and great for Han culture to accept the vast and unfamiliar horseshoe space. Xianbei wise men represented by Emperor Xiaowen Tuobahong did two major things for Han culture. In other words, they overcame two major shortcomings of Han culture. These two major shortcomings have become the root cause of the crisis of Han culture. What are the two major drawbacks?
The first shortcoming is that Chinese culture lacks the courage to freely gallop and expand freely in unfamiliar spaces. The second drawback is that Chinese culture lacks understanding and depth of other cultures in the world. At that time, these two shortcomings of Han culture became the reasons for its decline. These two ills are related to unfamiliarity. The first refers to unfamiliar space, and the second refers to unfamiliar culture.
Emperor Xiaowen and others turned out to be strangers who came on horseback. It sounds strange for strangers to solve unfamiliar problems, but it is full of profound cultural philosophy. So let’s talk about how they introduced these two strangers and overcame the shortcomings of Chinese culture. There are many aspects that need to be discussed from the root.
The first stranger
Let’s talk about the first stranger first. As the backbone of Chinese culture, Han culture has a long history, is exquisite and elegant, and has a large space for self-circulation. Therefore, it does not care much about the vast wilderness around it. It does not care much, and to be honest, it does not value it very much. As a result, the range of unfamiliarity in the heart is even greater than the range of geographical unfamiliarity. This is nothing in normal times, but when it encounters a crisis and encounters the overall decline of Chinese culture, it does not matter.
To use the original metaphor, culture is in its old house and courtyard. I don’t know how many times I have searched, discussed, and tossed about it, but I still haven’t found a way out or a sign of new life. Then the weather must be outside the old house and courtyard, and it may be far, far away.
There are thousands of miles of scenery of nomadic people far away, which makes the Han people deeply unfamiliar. For example, everyone knows that there is such a song, which is a folk song:
Chilechuan, at the foot of Yinshan Mountain. The sky is like a dome, covering the four fields. The sky is blue and the wilderness is vast. Cows and sheep can be seen in the windblown grass.
There is a strong sense of pride for the grassland here, but the pride is very peaceful. This kind of atmosphere is exactly what Chinese culture lacks. In addition to the vast horizon of the sky, we also need the characters and stories within this horizon. In the thinking habits of Han culture, war is always cruel and soldiers are always painful. This kind of psychology of pursuing peace is very good. But can you imagine? In the northern wilderness, among the galloping of war horses, special beautiful characters and special beautiful stories will also appear.
As soon as I told it, everyone understood that this is the story of Hua Mulan that we are all familiar with. "Chirp again chirp, Mulan is weaving in every household", this "Mulan Poem" that everyone can recite is a Northern Dynasties folk song, which comes from the northern desert. You see, compared with the common characters and stories in Chinese culture, in his stories, the difference between men and women, war and peace, all become games that can be switched at will. As a result, even the literati who originally clung to the walls of Han culture had to admit that Mulan is qualified to become the first-class image creation in Chinese culture. This fact proves that the Han culture has had to absorb nutrients from the northern wilderness to increase its strength.
Hua Mulan is an artistic image of a woman disguised as a man, so what would a real man look like in the northern wilderness? Obviously, this is even more unfamiliar to the original Chinese culture. The real men in the northern wilderness are the powerful men on horseback. According to the traditional concepts of Han culture, these powerful men on horseback are reckless people and have little to do with culture. In fact, the life style displayed by these powerful people is also a kind of culture, and it is a culture that people look up to.
They do not ride horses for fun, but generally have to indulge and collect large numbers of sheep, always have to avoid or defeat wolf attacks, always have to plan and design migration routes, and always have to discover and track the traces of enemies. In short, the reckless people in the minds of Han literati are actually extremely keen strategists and extremely efficient actors in a large space.
In Han culture, every one of the hundreds of scholars seriously lacked the ability to execute. They lectured and advised everywhere, but they were not very popular. They can only walk around and cannot find anyone, and some even say that they have simply become a lost dog. Now another collective personality has suddenly appeared. I won’t say much. I only act, and my actions are so galloping that no one can dominate them. As a result, a vast space is completely created.
Do you remember? When I first talked about the definition of culture, I once said that the ultimate precipitation of culture is collective personality. You see, what Emperor Xiaowen Tuobahong and the others brought not only was a strange vast space, but also a strange collective personality. Therefore, the culture may have fundamentally changed. With this strange collective personality history, a new chapter will surely be opened, and a magnificent miracle will surely occur in the culture.
The second stranger
Okay, now I’m going to talk about the second stranger. The first strangeness is the strangeness to the northern wilderness, and not only the strangeness to the northern wilderness, but also the strangeness to the collective personality of the powerful troops who emerged in the northern wilderness. I have already made it clear. Now let’s talk about the second stranger.
Emperor Xiaowen Tuobahong and others introduced a group of unfamiliar and distant colleagues to Chinese culture. In other words, they put Chinese culture into the world's cultural family. Isn't it strange that such an international cultural event is actually being managed by the leaders of a minority group? But it is true.
Before telling the reasons, I first ask everyone to go to the Yungang Grottoes in Datong, Shanxi. Datong was called Pingcheng at that time, and it was the capital of the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Yungang Grottoes there were built in the fifth century AD and reflect the cultural sentiments of Emperor Xiaowen Tuobahong and his predecessors. When you come to the grottoes, you will definitely be surprised. Why do such early Chinese grottoes have huge Greek and Roman style columns? Looking again at those huge statues, most of them have high nose bridges and deep eye sockets, which are obviously reminiscent of Greek sculptures. If you look more closely, you will find a series of aesthetic marks of Babylonian culture and Persian culture in many caves. Just from the Yungang Grottoes, we can find that the world's major cultures are integrated, integrated in China, and integrated in Yungang.
Why is there such a big integration? As I said before, Buddhism was introduced in the Han Dynasty, but its living conditions were relatively low. It often relied on Taoism to survive, but it developed very vigorously in the Wei, Jin, Southern and Northern Dynasties. Why is this? I will talk about it in future courses, but here I will only talk about the booming phenomenon itself and the cultural atmosphere it brings.
Most monarchs of the Northern Wei Dynasty advocated both Han culture and Buddhism. They thought to themselves, since I have already studied under Han Culture, why don’t I study under a few more teachers? Therefore, they settled Indian Buddhist art in Yungang through the hands of Tan Yao, a great sculptor snatched from afar.
But as everyone knows, Buddhism does not advocate statues. Later, when Aristotle's student Alexander went on an expedition to the East, he brought a group of Greek sculptors with him, and as a result, a Gandhara art was created in India that used Greek public methods to sculpt Buddha statues. You might as well remember this name, Gandhara. This Qian Ni is the word "牛" with the word "construction" added to it, Tuo is the word "Tuo" for Buddha, and "Luo" is the word "Luo" for Arhat. The English spelling of Gandhara is G-A-N-D-H-A-R-A. This is a very important term in the history of world art.
Gandhara art uses Greek techniques to sculpt Buddha statues. In fact, the Buddha statues not only have Greek charm, but also incorporate many elements of Babylonian culture and Persian culture that Alexander saw during his eastern expedition. Chinese Buddhist statues were originally introduced from Gandhara. In order to deeply understand this example of world cultural integration, I once went to Gandhara, and now I am in a place called Taxila in Pakistan. There is a ruins called Sirkapu there, but I suggest friends who like to travel not to go there for the time being, because you may face many dangers there. I took the risk to inspect Gandhara.
Okay, let’s circle back from Gandhara and return to Yungang. You will find that, as I said before, because it introduced the art of Gandhara, it actually allowed Indian culture, Babylonian culture, and Persian culture to appear together. Since its emergence, Chinese culture has been surrounded by these world’s great cultures. Surrounded by this kind of world culture, Chinese culture does not feel inferior at all. On the contrary, it draws inspiration from the various behaviors of its counterparts outside the territory.
This is a very spectacular image, and I have to use the old metaphor from before, that is, the old house and courtyard have been neglected for a long time, and suddenly there are noisy cars and horses, and there are a lot of guests, and every guest has a good reputation and a majestic air. As a result, the atmosphere of the old house and courtyard suddenly changed fundamentally. Moreover, some noble guests have decided to gather next to each other and will not leave. Therefore, the old house and the old courtyard have also opened their doors and will be completely renovated.
At this point, I must quickly summarize the overall impression. A group of ethnic minority politicians, represented by Tuoba Hong, not only successfully realized the Sinicization of their own nation, but also brought about major changes in Han culture. A vast space that was previously unfamiliar opened up, and an extremely strong collective personality entered in this vast space. All major cultures in the world at that time also gathered here.
When all these big things come together, something big is bound to happen. What's the big deal? After you visit the Yungang Grottoes one by one, you will find a stone tablet written by me on the west slope. I wrote eight words:
China moves towards the Tang Dynasty
It is said that many people take pictures in front of this stone monument every day. After seeing the grotto, everyone agreed with my conclusion. Yes, no matter how hard the hundreds of schools of thought, the emperors of Qin and Han, the heroes of the Three Kingdoms, and the celebrities of Wei and Jin, they could not create a great Tang Dynasty, because they all lacked some important conditions. Important conditions are now gathered and displayed at the Yungang Grottoes in Datong, Shanxi.
The emergence of the Tang Dynasty was a truly major event. There are also some stories about the West that I will spend several days telling in earnest. Now we are still staying in front of the Yungang Grottoes to express our deep gratitude to Emperor Xiaowen Tuoba Hong. Many Han historians are not very fond of this ethnic minority emperor who was not in power for a long time, but I think that he and his grandmother, Queen Mother Feng, used special efforts to push Chinese culture from malaise to health, and made early preparations for the birth of the Tang Dynasty.
I have served as the chairman of the Huangdi Cultural International Forum for eight consecutive terms. One year I initiated a selection, that is, using the Yellow Emperor's eyes to select which of the future emperors are worthy of Chinese history. Before the selection, I made a brief speech and said that in addition to the emperors that everyone will mention, please consider Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, a young emperor of the Xianbei tribe who only lived for 33 years. After everyone listened to my analysis, he passed with a high vote.
Four years ago, I was invited to give a lecture on Chinese culture in New York. After the speech, I visited the Metropolitan Museum again. Unintentionally, the image of Emperor Xiaowen was discovered in the relief of an ancient group portrait. I was very excited and immediately pulled my wife over to take a closer look.
Seeing our excited expressions, foreign friends also came over to take a closer look, looking at me with questioning eyes. When I thought about it, I couldn't explain the importance of this person in simple words. I just smiled and said from the bottom of my heart, please note that it is this young man who has greatly improved the world image of Chinese culture.