Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu. According to yesterday's preview, today we will talk about the lifestyle of the Song Dynasty. This serves as a basis and a background for us to talk about the culture of the Song Dynasty.
When talking about the lifestyle of the Song Dynasty, we must first compare it with the lifestyle of the Tang Dynasty, which we have highly praised.
Didn’t we mention many times before that a fire in the East Market of the Tang Dynasty burned down many shops? If we compare the commercial scene in Bianjing in the Qingming River Scene in the Song Dynasty, the West Market and East Market in Chang'an would be too cramped. After all, there was no such thing as the Tang Dynasty, and there were no such restrictions. Instead, it was completely open and free to circulate.
Just the handicraft industry, Bianjing's handicraft industry is four times more than that of Chang'an, remember, four times. As a major agricultural country, the rice planting area in the Song Dynasty doubled that of the Tang Dynasty, and planting technology improved rapidly. The rice yield per mu in Jiangsu and Zhejiang has reached 800 to 900 kilograms. Silk weaving and porcelain firing have entered a highly specialized stage of production, with both output and quality improving by leaps and bounds.
So, what about cities? In the Northern Song Dynasty alone, the total number of cities and towns was close to 2,000, and the urban population accounted for 12% of the country's total population. It was in the Song Dynasty that China's population exceeded 100 million. According to the statistics of the late American historian Mr. Huang Renyu, if the commodity circulation volume in the Song Dynasty were to be converted into our current international prices, it would have reached US$6 billion to US$7 billion. There is no doubt that the economic level of China's Song Dynasty was the highest in the world at that time.
The spiritual and cultural tone of the Song Dynasty
The expansion and improvement of lifestyle will inevitably lead to the expansion and improvement of spiritual values.
The scientific and technological creativity of the Song Dynasty reached the pinnacle of the entire ancient Chinese history, and has been praised by all experts in the world who study the history of human science and technology. I can talk about a few points casually. For example, it was the Song Dynasty that advanced woodblock printing to movable type printing, the Song Dynasty used gunpowder for warfare, and the Song Dynasty used compasses for navigation. These technologies were all spread to the West one after another, greatly promoting the progress of human civilization.
In the Song Dynasty, a series of important scientific and technological works also appeared, such as Shen Kuo's "Mengxi Bi Tan", Qin Jiuzhao's "Nine Chapters of Shu Shu", Su Song's "New Yixiang Fa Yao", Wang Weiwei's "Pictures of Acupuncture and Moxibustion on the Bronze Man's Acupoints", etc., and a professional atmosphere of serious research appeared in various disciplines.
When I was writing the history of Chinese drama more than 30 years ago, I spent a lot of time studying street life in the Song Dynasty, because the starting point of my study of Chinese drama was related to street life. Therefore, during the research process, I carefully read "Tokyo Menghua Lu", "Capital Records", "Mengliang Lu", "Old Martial Arts" and other works.
We know that Bianjing, the capital of the Northern Song Dynasty, and Lin'an, the capital of the Southern Song Dynasty, were already very sophisticated civil societies. In this civil society, education also broke through the power of the clans in the late Tang Dynasty, and showed a trend of civilianization and popularization. The imperial examination system even expanded its scope. Generally speaking, the Song Dynasty was the most culturally educated dynasty in ancient Chinese history. Let me say this again, in the entire ancient Chinese history, the Song Dynasty had the highest level of cultural education.
At this point, I have to make another international comparison. The Song Dynasty has a history of more than 300 years. During this period, the West was still trapped in the long and barren roads of the Middle Ages. Only a few streets paved with hard cobblestones in Florence, Italy, began to see a little breeze of civil society.
Later, I walked on these cobblestone streets again and again, thinking about the contrasting history between China and the West. In the year when the Southern Song Dynasty finally came to an end, Dante, known as the last poet in the European Middle Ages, was only 14 years old. It was not until 170 years later that Leonardo da Vinci, the first master of the Renaissance, was born, and the great changes in European society that emerged from the Renaissance would only happen later.
If I arrange the time in this way, everyone will know that the Song Dynasty in China and Europe are still incomparable.
However, the Song Dynasty is so wonderful, but it seems to give us the impression that the collective cultural personality is not too high-spirited. Although life is good, there is a serious lack of security. There are frequent wars all around, and most of them are defeated. The country's destiny has obviously lost its vitality. This overall situation makes it impossible for many cultural people to be as vigorous as they were during the heyday of the Tang Dynasty. They generally appear in a state of worry, introversion, and self-centeredness.
In such a state, culture appears stable and composed, saying goodbye to youthfulness and entering middle age. Let me make an analogy: as long as it is created by the people of the Song Dynasty, even if it is made by young people, the created works will always have a mature expression with fine wrinkles.
I must add that the intellectuals of the Song Dynasty, who were in confusion and distress, received special respect from the imperial court. The Song Dynasty was very strange. From the beginning, it valued civil servants more than military generals. It established rules not to kill civil servants and gave them unprecedented salaries and benefits. In my opinion, this salary package is also unprecedented, and the Song Dynasty also allowed the highest-ranking literati to hold the highest-ranking official positions, which I will talk about later.
All this shortened the psychological distance between the Song Dynasty scholars and the imperial court. In addition, the imperial court was often exhausted and in a hurry during external campaigns, which gave rise to a certain kind of sympathy and intervention among the intellectuals.
Therefore, there were few extreme cultural demands in the Song Dynasty, and they were basically in a state of freedom, self-reliance, and ease, which was the envy of cultural people in other eras. The situation of freedom and self-reliance in the Song Dynasty without being too strong. Later, as the social crisis deepened, some strong personality power appeared, and it was reflected in some strong poets, which I will talk about slowly. But overall, life in the Song Dynasty was good.
I see people often ask modern cultural people, if you put history before your eyes, which dynasty would you like to live in, or where would you like to live? Toynbee from Europe said that he very much hoped to live by the Tarim River. I have heard more Chinese literati from the older generation say they would like to live in the Tang Dynasty, but in my opinion, the best life for literate people was in the Song Dynasty.
In comparison, although the Tang Dynasty was high-spirited, in terms of life, it had not yet gotten rid of its weak economic foundation, and it had not yet gotten rid of such a volatile and unstable situation. In the Song Dynasty, although the general environment often had a sense of threat, in terms of life, the Tang Dynasty laid the foundation, the material conditions were established, and the lifestyle was slowly established, so life was particularly comfortable and harmonious.
Okay, we have talked about the lifestyle of the Song Dynasty and the spiritual tone of the Song Dynasty. Then we can seriously talk about what aspects of the cultural achievements of the Song Dynasty are manifested?
Cultural achievements of the Song Dynasty
The cultural achievements of the Song Dynasty are indescribable, there are simply too many. So I would like to focus on three aspects for you, please remember them. I will express these three aspects in terms of one, two and three:
1. A cultural all-rounder
2. Two senior cultural officials
3. Three war poets (people who wrote poetry during the war)
With this two-three structure, anyone who is slightly familiar with the culture of the Song Dynasty will basically be able to guess who I am going to talk about. Okay, I will go on slowly.
Let’s talk about the first item first, a cultural all-rounder. Yes, you have all guessed it, I am talking about Su Dongpo.
The importance of Su Dongpo to the Song Dynasty cannot be overstated. I can even use an imaginary virtual scene to illustrate. We imagine that one day, Nine Days will be able to comment on the top peak of Chinese cultural history, and the requirements are very strict. Then the representatives of each dynasty will definitely quarrel fiercely, because there are very few places.
Why quarrel? Because just a name will determine whether there is recognized glory in those hundreds of years, and the voice will become smaller and smaller in the end of the quarrel. Because clear grades appeared, Qu Yuan was in the pre-Qin Dynasty, but there was no one in the Qin Dynasty, Sima Qian was in the Han Dynasty, Tao Yuanming was in the Wei and Jin Dynasties, there were two in the Tang Dynasty: Li Bai and Du Fu, and in the Song Dynasty, it was Su Dongpo. He alone could greatly raise the cultural level of the Song Dynasty, making the Song Dynasty worthy of any paragraph in the entire cultural history.
Please note that there are many literati in each dynasty, and a number of outstanding literati can be counted. But there is often only one name that can make this dynasty proud for centuries, or such a name may not be found at all. Ironically, those dynasties whose names cannot be found often appear to be particularly lively culturally.
What's even more ironic is that the name that is recognized as being able to bring pride to the entire dynasty for centuries, if you look closely, you will see that he is always suffering and always being exiled. We have seen this in Qu Yuan, Sima Qian, Tao Yuanming, Li Bai, and Du Fu, and Su Dongpo will certainly not be an exception.
I have written many articles about Su Dongpo, and many people have read them. Some readers told me that they copied the sentences I wrote about Su Dongpo on paper and placed them under the glass plate of their desk. I have seen this scene with my own eyes many times.
The late Mr. Yu Jizhong, the founder of Taiwan's "China Times", personally told me during his lifetime that after reading my "Su Tungpo's Breakout", he then read Mr. Lin Yutang's biography of Su Tungpo based on the introduction in my article. He expressed his agreement with my criticism of Mr. Lin Yutang. However, Master Hsing Yun personally ordered that my article on Su Dongpo be reprinted in Buddhist publications. It's so long that it's published in all Buddhist publications.
What I said about Dongpo did have a greater impact in the Chinese world. For example, one time I went to eat in a small restaurant in the outskirts of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. There was actually a waiter who was also a reader of mine. He discussed with me for a long time when Su Dongpo truly matured in thought.
It can be seen that Su Dongpo is still the key to the huge Chinese cultural field to this day. Once Su Dongpo is taught, all Chinese students can get excited. I can't say much about the personality of Su Dongpo today, but there is a passage in "Chinese Context" that I want to read aloud to you. This can summarize what I want to talk about today.
This is what I wrote:
Su Dongpo was a cultural all-rounder. He was very proficient in poetry, poetry, articles, calligraphy, music, and Buddhism. Especially in poetry, prose, and calligraphy, he could be regarded for thousands of years. But Su Dongpo's greatest contribution to Chinese culture is that he left behind a happy and lovely personality.
Most of the cultural giants in Chinese history are more than respectable but not enough lovable. This is true from Qu Yuan and Sima Qian to Tao Yuanming. Their respectability is beyond doubt. But are they cute? There is not enough data to prove it.
Cao Cao, who wrote very good poems, was too intimidating, so of course he couldn't be considered cute. Many of the celebrities in the Wei and Jin Dynasties should be cute, but they are too weird, too stubborn, and too aloof. We can admire their backs, but it is difficult to make easy-going friends with them.
In the Tang Dynasty, poets headed by Li Bai must have been cute, but at that time the poetry was so powerful that they often became celebrities in the spotlight, and it was always difficult for celebrities to stay cute because there were often noisy voices around them, which made them abnormal.
Who would have expected that in the Song Dynasty, there would be such a Su Dongpo with normal body temperature and normal expression. Whether it is the long history, the vast sky, or personal troubles, there is a beautiful honesty in his writing that every reader can relate to. He is not only cute, but also amiable, and has become a brother and old friend in everyone's heart. This situation is almost unique in the history of Chinese culture.
Therefore, Su Dongpo is a miracle of personality. With the most honest, lovely and normal personality, he has opened up the collective personality of all Chinese readers. This is the miracle.
This is a passage I wrote in the Chinese context, but Su Dongpo hasn’t finished speaking yet. We will continue tomorrow.