Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu. Now let’s continue with the lecture. Let me repeat our lesson again. The current title is The World Identity of Chinese Culture, and the subtitle is The History of Chinese Culture from an International Perspective.
Today we are finally going to talk about the Tang Dynasty. The Tang Dynasty is very important. The Tang Dynasty is the highest honor of Chinese culture, and therefore it is also the highest step for Chinese culture to achieve world status. Of course there were many steps later, some high and some low, but none of them surpassed the Tang Dynasty in terms of overall height.
Since it is the highest step, of course it has iconic significance. Therefore, everyone knows that the word "Tang" often becomes the simplest symbol of China, Chinese people, and Chinese culture. When you travel around the world, you will find that there are Chinatowns everywhere, as well as Tang costumes and Tang music. This is an example.
Chinatowns are mostly Chinese settlements in many European and American cities. Generally speaking, compared with other mid-level and high-end communities, Chinatowns often appear to be lower-level, crowded and messy, and also display a gaudy and dense cultural scene. Sometimes we are not happy to see this. This is a contrast caused by the decline of China's national power and the downward trend of its culture in modern times. That’s because the word “Tang” is a bit tainted.
In fact, when the Tang Dynasty stood in the world, those cities were still deserted, and the strategic state of the Tang Dynasty was so elegant and noble. We might as well take a look at Kyoto and Nara in Japan today. They are only partial simulations of the urban charm of the Tang Dynasty in China, but when we look at them today, they are still breathtaking.
It is more interesting when we think about it. Our vast and numerous Chinese people were named by two distant dynasties, one is the Han people, and the second is the Tang people. In comparison, the term Han people mainly refers to the difference from other ethnic minorities domestically, while the term Tang people mainly refers to all Chinese internationally. It can be seen that Tang has a more worldly identity.
China leads the world at its highest point
What I want to say now is that the Tang Dynasty was not only the highest coordinate of China, but also the highest coordinate of the world. What I say is not a judgment that the Chinese are bragging about. No, this is a world consensus. When I visit some famous ancient city ruins abroad, I always encounter such scenes. There was a commentator saying that this should be the most magnificent city in the world in the seventh century AD, and the audience was curiously waiting for the second half of the sentence that the commentator had not yet finished. The second half of the sentence is, except of course Chang'an.
What impressed me most was a fat female guide in Luxor, Egypt. She was saying that the ancient name of Luxor was Thebes, and it was the top city of the entire ancient world. As soon as she said this, she caught sight of a few Chinese people and immediately said with a smile, "Of course I didn't compare China's Tang Dynasty in it."
Then there are more conclusions from international historians. As a Chinese, of course I am embarrassed to quote too much, but there is an American historian, Stavrianos, who has made it clear that he wants to construct a general history of the world in the 21st century (I am a little interested in this person). He made this judgment in his latest publication "A General History of the World". Please listen to this judgment. He said:
After the collapse of Rome, Europe entered the Middle Ages, while China made rapid progress and has always been the most populous, richest, and most advanced country in the world. From the 6th century to the 16th century AD, Chinese civilization has always led the world with its tenacious vitality and great contribution to human heritage.
I want to read it again, this is a statement of Stavrianos. He said that after the collapse of Rome, Europe entered the Middle Ages, while China made rapid progress and has always been the most populous, richest and most advanced country in the world. From the 6th century to the 16th century AD, Chinese civilization has always led the world with its tenacious vitality and great contribution to human heritage.
Stavrianos also specifically stated that he said that the world was led by China within 1,000 years. This statement was relatively conservative, because he said that China had successfully caught up with other civilizations in Eurasia as early as the Han Dynasty. If he follows his calculation, it will take another five to six hundred years. So we Chinese might as well be a little more reserved and say more than a thousand years. During these more than a thousand years, there was a high point, and this high point was the Tang Dynasty. The Tang Dynasty was the highest point that allowed China to lead the world for more than a thousand years.
I would like to say here that some scholars in China have always believed that the Tang Dynasty was not as good as we say because there were many hidden class conflicts. The army sometimes loses in battles, so I really don't know what the good standards are for scholars like them. Is there no class conflict? Isn’t the battle lost? In fact, according to us, whether something is good or bad mainly depends on comparison, that is, to measure and judge through comparison.
Chang'an in space
I think that comparing the Tang Dynasty with the previous and later dynasties in time is something that many friends can do. I want to provide a special perspective, that is, make some horizontal comparisons from space. I think our Chinese historians have done relatively little on this point.
My comparison is this, I speak a little faster. In the 7th century AD, the population of Chang'an City was as high as 1 million, and the population of Rome was less than 50,000. Even before Rome declined, its area was only 1/7 of Chang'an. After the fall of Rome, Europe has been permeated by the dark cloud of medieval theological extremism, which often lit the fire that burned pagans. For example, I once spent a lot of time in Toledo, the capital of Spain at that time. In this city alone, the Inquisition burned hundreds of thousands of people to death.
Looking eastward from Europe, the once powerful Persian Empire was occupied by Arab forces in the middle of the 7th century. In order to protect their royal family, the Tang Dynasty also established a Persian Protectorate. At about this time, India fell into chaos due to the death of King Harsha.
If you want to compare cities, in addition to Chang'an, the more decent capitals in the world at that time were Constantinople and Baghdad. Constantinople was the capital of the Byzantine Empire and a hub connecting the East and the West. Baghdad was the center of the powerful Arab Empire at that time, but if the two capitals were added together, they would be less than half of Chang'an in terms of area and population. The comparison in this capital city is this.
Speaking of these comparisons, I am already a little worried, because I am afraid that it will lead to too many topics about Chang'an and consume too much of our time. Therefore, we must quickly return to culture, and don’t just talk about urban architecture and city scale. Back to culture, you may have misunderstandings, because I will talk about Li Bai and Du Fu soon. No, let's ask these elderly people to take a break first. Let's talk about some important cultural prerequisites first, and then slowly we will invite them out in the future.
Business life without borders
You must still remember that when I explained the definition of culture earlier in the course, I stated that culture is first of all a habitual spiritual value and lifestyle. Let's talk about lifestyle first. I am very anxious to tell you that Chang'an in the Tang Dynasty was accustomed to a cosmopolitan lifestyle, which was an important foundation of Tang culture. A cosmopolitan lifestyle, is this a bit too much? But it is true.
The people of Chang'an live a commercial life without national borders. I want to tell you that the city of Chang'an covers an area of ​​more than 80 square kilometers. There are two commercial markets in it, one is called the East Market and the other is called the West Market. They each cover an area of ​​one square kilometer, and together they account for two square kilometers. Compared with the entire Chang'an City of more than 80 square kilometers, it is only 1/40, which is a small proportion. But whether it is the East Market or the West Market, it is very beautiful here. There is a tic-shaped street in each. The tic-shaped street is divided into nine commercial areas, which is very lively. Compared with the West Market, the West Market has concentrated a large number of foreign merchants, so it is more prosperous than the East Market; although the East Market is not as prosperous as the West Market, it is lively enough.
In the article "Looking Up to Chang'an", I quoted the diary of a Japanese monk Ennin. This monk Ennin came to Chang'an to study Buddhism and lived in the less prosperous Dongshi. He left a diary. This monk liked keeping diaries very much. He wrote:
On June 27, a fire broke out in Dongshi in the middle of the night, burning more than 4,400 shops in the 24th row west of Caomen.
This simple record is really an important piece of economic information. A fire burned down more than 4,000 shops in 24 rows outside Caomen in Dongshi. So I want to ask, how many rows are there in Dongshi? According to statistics, there are two hundred and twenty lines, which is almost ten times more than twenty-four lines. Please do some calculations. In the 24th row, more than 4,000 shops were burned. So if it is 220 rows, how many shops can be burned? How many shops does it have in total? I am also talking about the less prosperous Dongshi.
So what will happen if you think about it in West City? The West Market has an exotic atmosphere, and the strange thing is that it is this exotic atmosphere that has become the main theme of Chang'an City. There are many hotels and restaurants, the most attractive one is of course Orchid Restaurant. Ji is the "ji" next to the female character, and Hu Ji is the service lady inside. They are all beautiful girls from Central and West Asia. Around the wine shop, you can see Byzantine-style architecture, Roman art, Indian acrobatics, and many shops that like to decorate with Greek honeysuckle patterns.
I have already mentioned before that Persia was occupied by the Arabs, but you can see both Persians and Arabs on Chang'an Street. I haven't found any record of them fighting in Chang'an in the historical materials, so it can be seen that they were generally in peace. The Persians were losers on the battlefield, but winners in the marketplace. They are in charge of Chang'an's gems, agates, spices, and medicines.
What is even more refreshing is that Persian clothing became popular in Chang'an. We know that Iranian women's clothing has more restrictions now, but at that time it was just the opposite. They were leading the trend because of their bold fashion. Not only are the fabrics very thin, but they also have beautiful patterns, they are tight-fitting and low-cut, and they change frequently, which is an eye-opener for women from all over the world, especially Chinese women. Now we can still see some traces of it in Eastern murals.
This reminds me of a joke. A few years ago, some young people from the National Essence Party strongly called for all Chinese to wear Hanfu as long as they participate in the Olympics or other international events. I happened to be taking a class at Peking University at that time, and some students asked me during the question and answer session in class what I thought of such a proposition. It’s about how Chinese people must wear Hanfu when participating in activities. I had two answers at the time. The first was that it was not a good thing to unify the clothing of ordinary people in a forced way, no matter what the excuse. The second reason was that as early as the Tang Dynasty, few people in Chang'an remembered what Hanfu looked like, and this was no longer the case in the Tang Dynasty.
cosmopolitan lifestyle
Okay, after this interjection, let's go back to Chang'an. Chang'an rarely has such extreme thinking. There are many foreigners on the streets of Chang'an. There are more than 30,000 international students, including more than 10,000 Japanese students. Foreign students can also take the imperial examination. In the late Tang Dynasty alone, there were more than 50 Silla scholars in this kind of imperial examination, which is now the Silla scholar in North Korea.
Everyone knows that the so-called imperial examination system is actually a civil service selection system. Those who pass the examination can become officials. Therefore, after those foreign candidates pass the examination, they are qualified to hold official positions in China. Indeed, many of them stay in China to serve as officials. Not only are there so many overseas students and foreign candidates, but what is even more rare is that the imperial court attaches great importance to them.
A few years ago, a square tombstone was unearthed in Xi'an, with an epitaph engraved on it, indicating that the tomb was that of a 19-year-old Japanese student studying abroad. He passed away in Chang'an, and the Chinese emperor actually wrote an epitaph for the foreign student himself, and the epitaph mentioned "Japan". Please note that this is the first time in history that the word "Japan" officially appears on this epitaph. I remember that when I went to Tokyo to attend the United Nations World Civilization Conference in 2006, Japan was still commemorating this event, which was the Chinese emperor writing a tombstone for a 19-year-old Japanese student. I also participated in the grand ceremony.
During the ceremony, I thought, my God, the emperor of the Tang Dynasty actually wrote an epitaph for a 19-year-old foreign kid himself. What kind of dynasty was this! Therefore, more than ten years ago, Xi'an decided to restore the ruins of the Daming Palace, where the imperial palace of the Tang Dynasty was located, and the Japanese government decided to fund infrastructure projects. I am the cultural consultant for the restoration project of this site, and I know that this is a distant repayment of gratitude from foreign countries to the Tang Dynasty.
There was a Persian who was actually sent by the Tang Dynasty to the Byzantine Empire as an ambassador. Please note that he was a Persian, but he was the ambassador of the Tang Dynasty. His name is called Aluo Sheng in Chinese history, A is the Arabic "A", Luo is the Roman "Luo", and Sheng is the "Shout" of shouting loudly. This word has actually entered our text. Now there is a Japanese scholar named Hiroshi Uda, who believes that Alo is actually Abraham, a common name among Jews. You think, since he is a Persian and has a Jewish name, he is most likely a Jew who immigrated to Persia.
For this reason, I once personally took an adventure to Hamadan, a small city in western Iran, to inspect the remains of the earliest Jewish immigrants to Persia. Not only did I see the tombs where ancient Jews were buried here, but I also met living Iranian Jews. We all know that Iran and the Jews seem to have a very bad relationship in international politics now, but this was not the case in ancient times. A Persian Jew actually served as China's ambassador to Byzantium. This can prove that due to the cosmopolitan lifestyle of the Tang Dynasty, all boundaries were likely to be eliminated.
This cosmopolitan lifestyle takes place in a world-class urban environment, and the level of its urban environment is also world-class. Chang'an's Zhuque Street is 155 meters wide, which is more than 30 meters wider than the Champs Elysées in Paris. According to archaeological discoveries, sewers were installed on both sides of the streets in Chang'an at that time. Elm and locust trees were planted beside the sewers. There was also a sidewalk about one meter wide.
There are 108 squares designated in Chang'an City. "Fang" is the word "Tu" with a square "square" next to it. Whenever the sun goes down, Chang'an imposes a curfew and locks up each and every workshop. Citizens can only move around inside the workshop. Of course, the workshop is not small. For some citizens who pursue freedom, if they find it inconvenient to live in Chang'an, they can move to Luoyang in the east or Chengdu in Sichuan. Of course, the freest place is Yangzhou in the south. At that time, Yangzhou was already a dock with a large number of foreign ships coming and going, and the nightlife was more affluent, debauched and unrestrained.
In terms of management, the management of Chang'an City is much stricter than that of Luoyang and Yangzhou because it is the capital. At the same time, due to strict management, it became the safest capital among the capitals of the world at that time. As you can see from a little comparison, the world at that time was very turbulent.