Hello everyone, I am Yu Qiuyu, let’s continue the lecture.
We have finished talking about Buddhism last time. According to our expectations, when talking about the collective personality of Chinese culture, we should first talk about the way of the gentleman. Then Buddhism talks about the goal of the enlightened person, the gentleman, the enlightened person, and Taoism talks about the real person, these three. So, strictly speaking, we have to talk about Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism.
Facing the confusion caused by Buddhism, the opportunity for the transformation of Confucianism
Confucianism, the way of a gentleman, I spent a long time and everyone listened to it. I have actually finished talking about Buddhism, and when it comes to Zen Buddhism, I have already finished talking about it last time, so logically I should talk about Taoism. But please wait a minute. With the vigorous spread of Buddhism in China, many people have turned to Buddhism, and Buddhism shows such high wisdom and high realm. In this regard, China's basic thinking is still Confucian thinking after all, because the country needs governance and the people need management. In this case, it is entirely possible to use monastic Buddhism. In Chinese society, it is unlikely to become the mainstream of real social management. Therefore, Confucian thinkers began to reflect on themselves when faced with the rise of Buddhism and people's acceptance of Buddhism.
Our gentleman's way, our self-cultivation, family management, country governance, and world peace, we have always liked and adhered to our ideas very much. Why do we seem a bit useless after encountering Buddhism? Why are so many ordinary people slowly moving towards Buddhism and gradually neglecting us? What’s more, what’s even more troublesome is that many wise men with high levels of knowledge and early Confucian education gradually moved toward Buddhism, and in the process of moving toward Buddhism, they wrote many beautiful articles and poems. This point caused Confucian scholars to think deeply and waver.
Therefore, before I preach about Taoism, I must talk about the trends of Confucianism. This is very important. Confucianism, we cannot stop at the era of Confucius and Mencius. Since then, it has continued to develop and promote, and it has continued to play the role of the patriarch in the ups and downs of China's social management and social thinking. However, parents inherit it from generation to generation. These people who manage the country, manage society, and manage people's hearts. When they faced Buddhism, they complained at the beginning. As I mentioned before, for example, Han Yu complained very much, and many people complained. The problem is, as time goes by, it is useless for you to complain, because this land has been penetrated by Buddhism, so many people have accepted Buddhism, and the thinking ability of Buddhism itself has also made those wise men with high IQs feel drummed in their hearts.
Obviously, there are many issues that go beyond our Confucian thinking. At this point, Confucianism has undergone changes. This makes me have to pay attention to the changes in our Confucianism before preaching. This is also an important trend in the field of Chinese thinking.
There are two kinds of people among Confucian scholars, those who are good at learning and those who are not good at learning. As for those who are good at learning, they gradually understand that the popularity of Buddhism has exposed the shortcomings of Confucianism. Confucianism promotes social order, while Buddhism explores the nature of the human heart. Social order is the textbook for rulers, and the nature of the human heart is a question for all people. Textbooks on social order will definitely refer to the wishes of a large number of powerful people, but questions about the nature of people's hearts will inspire the awareness of all living beings in the world. This is different.
In this case, can Confucianism, which has always been dominant, change its status and gain more lessons from the outside? However, it is troublesome for Confucianism to benefit from it, because it has a long history, a broad background, and many resources, and it is difficult to transform it significantly. Without a major transformation, the lessons it can gain will always be limited. Do you understand? It is very difficult for a car with a very heavy load to undergo a large-scale transformation on the road. This was the form of Confucianism at that time. It has always been dominant. It has many scholars, many books, and many schools. It is very difficult for it to transform. If it changes slightly, it means it has not changed. If it changes significantly, who will do it? Who is this driver? This problem is relatively big.
Fortunately, there are still some outstanding understanding people among Confucian scholars, and there are more than one or two. So starting from the Tang Dynasty, especially during the Song and Ming dynasties, Confucianism underwent a major transformation, giving rise to New Confucianism.
When we talk about New Confucianism now, we often refer to the present. My friends like Professor Du Weiming, they do it. No, during the Tang and Song Dynasties, there was already Neo-Confucianism. The focus of old Confucianism is to promote the ethical order, while the characteristic of new Confucianism is to study Buddhism and explore the true nature of people's hearts. This is undoubtedly influenced by Buddhism and Zen. Think about it, everyone. Old Confucianism mainly promoted the moral order; after New Confucianism learned Buddhism, it mainly focused on exploring the nature of the human heart, which must have been influenced by Buddhism.
The Transformation of Confucianism: Neo-Confucianism’s Reference to Zen Buddhism
The new generation of Confucian scholars believe that all kinds of right and wrong in the social order are related to a more abstract nature. Confucius and Mencius said many good things, but if the social order is to be maintained, what is its right and wrong? There must be a kind of nature, and this nature, the nature of nature, must be related to heaven. Therefore, Confucian scholars desperately searched for various passages about the mysterious relationship between heaven and man in "Shangshu", "Zuo Zhuan" and "Mencius", and then further delved into the starting point and conclusion of the human world. The old Confucian scholars were not very interested in this kind of research, which was to study the mysterious relationship between heaven and man, and to explore the beginning and end of the human world. Confucius, Mencius, and the older generation of traditional Confucianism were not very interested; but among New Confucianism, it has advanced by leaps and bounds.
Since Neo-Confucianism is studying that kind of issue, it is studying various starting points and endings related to heaven and earth, but it is still very different from Zen Buddhism. From the outside, the New Confucianists who studied these profound knowledge, later called Neo-Confucianism or Xinxue, looked very serious, heavy, and strenuous; while Zen Buddhism has always been so light, playful, and straightforward. Why is this happening? This is because Neo-Confucianism and the philosophy of mind always want to identify right and wrong in the world, good and evil, and always cut right and wrong with one knife. As for Zen Buddhism, there is no consciousness to separate and no mind to identify, so it seems particularly relaxed.
Regarding this issue, I think we cannot laugh at those Neo-Confucian scholars. They are in a crisis stage of thinking in the midst of a very difficult transformation. They have always upheld a series of social responsibilities and some social ideals. This is the foundation of their lives. Therefore, no matter how mysterious, profound or illusory their thoughts are, they cannot escape. Instead, they will come back and face the Buddhist Zen masters to make their own thoughts.
Zen masters can think about those free issues on the mountain top very easily, but it is difficult for our New Confucian scholars to give up social responsibilities, human ideals, and the foundation of their lives. They will ask the Zen master, your wits and epiphanies are so wonderful, how many people in the world can truly understand them? If you are always limited to a few wise men on the top of the mountain and among the white clouds, then how can you accomplish what Buddha said about extraditing sentient beings?
Please pay attention to a question. The question raised by Confucian scholars on this issue actually makes some sense. Your Zen Buddhism, your Buddhist principles, your epiphanies, and your wits are of course very superb, but how many people in the world can understand them? If all this can only belong to a handful of wise men among the white clouds on the top of the mountain, then how can you extradite so many sentient beings at the foot of the mountain that you want to extradite? To be fair, Confucian scholars feel that this kind of question is a bit righteous, because this is a large group of Chinese scholars. Their spiritual self-preservation can only be faced directly, and it is difficult to criticize them.
If we think about it, including me and many of my friends, we are actually one of them. We have social responsibilities, we have human ideals, and we care about many, many real people, rather than the more empty Buddhist talk of extradition for life. What we think of are all kinds of specific people on the streets of society, all kinds of people in the fields of the countryside, and this is what we think of. How to solve it? Therefore, as for this question, the question raised by Confucian scholars actually makes some sense.
I am also very able to understand their thinking, but I am a little bit special, because I miss the celebrities of the Wei and Jin Dynasties very much, and because of my investment in artistic aesthetics, I have the ability to communicate artistic thinking that has fascinated me throughout my life in Zen Buddhism. For me, I am closer to art because of the Wei and Jin Dynasties, and I am closer to my nature because of Zen Buddhism. Generally speaking, I am more accepting of Zen Buddhism. Because of this, I look at New Confucianism from this standpoint, which is relatively objective.
Thanks!