Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu.
I talked about the issue of order last time. We must be strict with order. This is an idea that our ancestors had very early on. Confucius had been running around for such a long time, calling for the establishment of an order similar to that of the Zhou Dynasty. Its order was embodied in the form of etiquette. I mentioned last time that all civilizations are pursuing order, but only China regards the construction of order as the first priority. Order has many negative effects in our lives. Why do we seem to be unfree, unwilling, and uncomfortable, so we always have to overthrow the old order and establish a new order.
But for people like me, when I was young, I always thought about establishing a new order. I never thought about what would happen if there was no order. The world-wide inspection gave me a lot of inspiration. When I went out for inspection, the social situation in China was still not very good. It was still very poor and backward, and it was still dirty and messy. This situation existed everywhere. There are also many places where there is no order, but we really haven’t seen what it will be like if a place is completely out of order.
a whole set of order
When I visited a country, the buses in their capital never stopped. Old people, young people, men, and women would jump up and down like monkeys when they saw the buses coming. I was very, very surprised by this. Why didn't I stop? The cemetery is in the middle of the city. Many homeless people and even people who have escaped from prison live there. The police have no right to investigate because this is a cemetery. At least one-third of all buildings are uncapped and the steel bars are exposed. This is still the case even after ten years. If you ask them, they will say that this makes us feel like we are living in a new house. This is nonsense, but it is actually for tax avoidance.
This is called very disordered, but we have seen even more disordered scenes. In the country I just talked about, they heard that a few of us were going to invade Iraq. They even held a grand farewell party to bid farewell to us and the Chinese heroes. Why did they think we went to those places? I said you have already reached this level of chaos. How much chaos will it get inside? The old man smiled and said, go in and have a look. Later, when you read my book, you will know that the scene we saw was indeed terrifying.
But in many countries that seem to be actually very friendly, we also see unimaginable scenarios. For example, there are thousands of tourists and thousands of passengers hanging on the train, on the windows, and on the doors. A good passenger car is modified after buying it and converted into a three-story building. The top floor was rickety and filled with primary school students. There are endless car accidents every day, which is a serious disorder.
This kind of disorder can spread very quickly and be difficult to rectify. When I visited some historical countries in South and West Asia, I often saw such scenes. There is dust everywhere in those cities. Men ranging from thirteen or fourteen to seventy-something years old stand on the garbage pile. The garbage pile is so big that you can tell that it has not been cleaned for decades. The man standing on the garbage line was also covered in dust, with only the whites of his eyes and teeth white. Groups of people were standing there, what were they doing? Not doing much, just looking at each other. You look at me and I look at you, and you don’t talk much, just a few words occasionally.
After we arrived, they felt that something good had happened today and they all looked at us. I asked them what they were eating. They said that sometimes the government and the mayor would give them some food, cakes and so on for the election. They are all strong and strong. They are still standing upright on the garbage heap in their seventies. They are so young at thirteen or fourteen years old, so of course they are in very good health. The companion who went with me thought about a question. Wouldn't it be great if a mayor or a district chief asked these people to bend down and clean up the rubbish that has been accumulated for decades under their feet? This land would belong to them and let them cultivate it. I believe that we Chinese all have this idea, and I also have this idea. Wouldn't it be great to transport the garbage away, fill it somewhere, and then cultivate the land to grow the agricultural products needed by the local area?
However, the next question arises, if this land is to be cultivated, where will the agricultural tools come from? Where do the seeds come from? Where does irrigation come from? Where does the transportation come from? Nothing. Therefore, just to clear a small piece of land and plant crops, we are faced with a whole set of order. This order is a system engineering. Once any link falls off, the entire system collapses.
So, do you know that we are living a relatively normal life now? There is a lot of strict order hidden behind every normal life. As long as one turnbuckle is wrong, this order will no longer exist. Therefore, it takes many years of hard work to establish order before it can be sustained. So based on this, we must express some kind of gratitude to our ancestors. I look at the groups of foreign men standing on the garbage dump, from teenagers to men in their seventies, only the whites of their eyes and teeth are white. I can't help but thank our Chinese predecessors for their hard work and protection again and again.
big order and little order
But when it comes to establishing order, these people standing on the garbage dump are just like ordinary people in ancient China. They cannot establish strong desires. Why establish order? It will be so troublesome for you to establish order. How can we become the screws in the order process?
Under this situation, Confucius had a very good idea. His idea was that a large order must be persuaded by a small order, demonstrated by a small order, and piloted by a small order. The integrity and perfection of the small order will definitely bring about the completeness and perfection of the large order. Therefore, Confucius created a very good concept for establishing order. This concept is called "family-state isomorphism", which means that the family and the country are put into the same structural system for comparison.
The order of the family is set one by one by blood, seniority, age, rank, and marriage, so it is very clear. The etiquette and rules derived from this order are also well known. So what if these family orders are enlarged, moved outward, and diffused one by one, and become a social order? What if we use this to become a national order? It is to slowly expand from the natural family order to social order and national order. This idea made them very excited, so they proposed a process from home to country, called self-cultivation, harmonizing the family, governing the country and bringing peace to the world. Organizing the family and governing the country are connected. When the family is in order, the country is also governed. In other words, a project was launched that compared the private spatial order with the public spatial order. This project is what I call "home-state isomorphism."
This builds a logical bridge between social order and national order. The person who built this bridge probably only loved his family and relatives at first, but slowly it spread, from his own elders to the elders outside, from his own children to the children outside. When it spreads bit by bit, the family order becomes a model of social order. There is a passage in the ancient Chinese classic "The Book of Changes" in which family and country are mixed into a continuous concept. Let me read it:
There is heaven and earth, and then there are all things; there are all things, and then there are men and women; there are men and women, and then there are husband and wife; there are husband and wife, and then there are father and son; there are father and son, and then there are monarchs and ministers; there are monarchs and ministers, and then there are up and down; there are up and down, and then there is something wrong with etiquette.
It connects the order of heaven and earth, the order of family, the order of gender, the order of father and son, and the order of monarch and ministers. The advantage of this connection is that it puts the order of heaven and earth and the order of family first, and describes the order of kings and ministers as a derived order, which is different from what later kings imagined.
However, there are indeed many problems with this kind of project that is homogeneous for the country and the country. So what's the problem? That is, social justice cannot be confused with family internal rules, and political rationality cannot come from the judgment of parents. Those enlightenment thinkers in the late Ming and early Qing Dynasties, the people I call Huang Zongxi, Gu Yanwu, and Wang Fuzhi, have always said that the general public has no reason to forgive the emperor like they forgive their old father. The state must be careful not to slip into the quagmire of the family and the world. This is repeatedly proposed by the Enlightenment, and it is also a very important correction to the concept of "the isomorphism of the family and the state."
This was indeed the case in ancient China. The "country" in the "family-state isomorphism" mainly refers to the imperial court, which is different from the motherland we talk about now. They rarely considered the public space. When talking about the country in ancient times, the country mainly referred to the imperial court and rarely considered the public space. Therefore, they do not take into account the people standing on the garbage dump doing nothing. This problem was later solved very well in Europe. I will talk specifically about the issue of public space later. Europe has solved this problem better than we do. Although we live a long life, many embarrassing things often happen to our tourists when they travel to Europe or go to other places. Therefore, there is a very big rift in our "family-state isomorphism", that is, the general order of society and the small order of the family are different.
I used to often go to some houses in Shanghai and saw that many ordinary people in Shanghai were like this. The houses in their homes were really clean and beautiful. But just outside a door, all the rubbish is thrown there, all the rags are thrown there, ignoring each other. You should walk on tiptoe in public spaces. After knocking on the door, you will find a beautiful private space inside. Therefore, the isomorphism of family and state is actually just a symbol, and it is difficult to say that it completely solves the problem. The reason is very simple, because in classical society and feudal society, the concept of country was not specific, and it was not a public space as we understand it now. When the country is only understood as the imperial court, your "family-state isomorphism" only requires people to face the emperor like their own parents. If this is such a thinking, the problem of establishing public order will be very big.
In ancient China, Confucianism had a warm idea of ​​"the isomorphism of family and state", but Legalism was different. If it wanted to establish social order, it used very powerful means to protect the world. Of course, its methods are very effective. Although many rulers verbally used Confucian discourse, they actually used Legalist tactics. Later, although order was established and civilization continued, this order was branded with a certain bad court, and this brand also had a long life, so this is what we need to pay attention to when we want to correct various ills of Chinese civilization over the years. It does bring about the continuation of Chinese civilization and the longevity of Chinese culture, but it also brings about the longevity of another bad factor related to it, which is something that Chinese culture needs to continuously improve.
Simplify thinking
I have already talked about four secrets. The land is large and the people are large, we never go on expeditions, we pursue unity, and we are strict about order. These are all relatively big aspects, but these big aspects have not yet fully touched upon the ontology of our culture. What we are talking about is a macro-choice. Chinese culture has made the choice and positioning just mentioned in the macro-history and in the macro-social direction. Some are not choices, they are indeed our own existence. For example, the land is large and there are many people; not going on an expedition and seeking unity and order are our serious choices.
But when all this is implemented in the ontology of culture, what good specialties will emerge to make Chinese culture live longer? This is also the advantage of Chinese culture. I announced this ontological characteristic last time. I will talk about it again now. One is to simplify thinking, another is to downplay competition, another is to guard against extremes, and the last one is to implement imperial examinations. I will talk about these slowly and little by little.
Now let me talk about simplifying thinking first, because this will definitely cause some people to not understand. Because many of our scholars now like to describe ancient Chinese classics as very complex and difficult. Just like those CEO Chinese Studies classes I mentioned earlier, they drew thick curtains and taught for several months at a time, slowly and slowly, as if there were many extremely complicated secrets inside that needed to be kept in this dark room and not allowed to be overheard by everyone. They needed to be deciphered bit by bit. In fact, the main reason why Chinese culture can live long is simple from the very beginning.
Chinese culture has always maintained the image of a lean, lean, cheerful traveler. What is the image of a traveler? Do you still remember Huang Zongxi, whom I talked about earlier, who lived to a very long life? He stabbed the enemy who killed his father, organized guerrillas to fight against the Qing Dynasty, gave lectures, did so many things, and lived to a ripe old age. There is also Gu Yanwu, who I admire even more. He rode a horse or a mule all over China, going to the more difficult places. He hung his books on the horns of an ox and walked slowly by himself. He wrote so many books and left so many good things for Chinese culture. This is the image of a lean and lean traveler. The basic image of Chinese culture has never been fat-brained, full-bodied, pot-bellied, never has been.
The very important reason is that our Chinese culture needs to be simple from the beginning. There are thousands of words to grasp the lifeblood. For example, "The Book of Changes" says that the lifeblood of Chinese culture is humanities, and looking at humanities can transform the world. What does "seeing human culture transform the world" mean? Chinese culture keeps a respectful distance from the legends of ghosts and gods. Talking about ghosts and gods has nothing to do with the ontology of Chinese culture. All things strive for wonder, keep them in a sparse manner, and playing with things hurts your will. For very strange things and very precious things, you can avoid them by just looking at them from a distance. Just laugh at the high-spirited talk and ignore it.
Compared with other civilizations, Chinese culture saves countless words and volumes of high-minded talk. There are no legends of ghosts and gods, no in-depth analysis of rare things, and no thick volumes of high-level talks. All of a sudden, it's easy, and that's it from the beginning. The first of our classics, "Zhouyi", the word "Yi" has the first meaning of simplicity and the second meaning of change. Studying changes and difficulties in a simple way, and the research method is not abstract, but presented with the probability of divination. This is actually the pioneer work of Chinese civilization.
It can be seen that simplicity is a very important cultural feature of ours.