Hello everyone, I am Yu Qiuyu, and we continue to talk about Buddhism. I mentioned that I had a very close relationship with Master Hsing Yun. During this process, I later went to India to pay homage to many of the places where Gautama Buddha visited. The place where he was born is now in Nepal. This place is called Lumpi, and I also stayed there for a long time. When I was investigating the earliest traces of Buddhism, I discovered that many places of civilization in the world were indeed mired in war and terror.
The classic among Buddhist classics - "Heart Sutra"
When I went to Buddhist holy places to worship, I actually compared heaven step by step from hell. Because the world I saw at that time was filled with so much opposition, so much competition, so much hatred, so much desire, and so many wars. The opponents in all conflicts raised their fingers, pointed at each other’s noses, and denounced them angrily. In fact, their problems were basically the same. In this overall atmosphere of terrorism, I rushed to Bodhgaya, India, and found the Bodhi tree. Yes, it was the place where the Buddha Sakyamuni first became enlightened. After verification by many Buddhist scholars, the location was accurate. However, after more than two thousand years, of course it was not that tree anymore. According to research, the seeds of the original tree came to Sri Lanka. Later, the seeds of this seed came to Bodh Gaya, where he originally meditated.
I sat there for a long time, and dozens of monks came from all over the world to sit with me. I have been thinking that he practiced hard in the cave for many years and finally came to the bodhi tree. What on earth was he thinking? He became enlightened here. What concepts and thoughts did he become enlightened about? This is the simplest spiritual fulcrum that I seriously need to find. I have always wanted to find the most concise spiritual fulcrum of Buddhism. I sat under the bodhi tree, thinking and thinking, thinking that the point of enlightenment was the spiritual fulcrum I was looking for. So I was thinking that I must find a text. After searching for a lot of time and reading many scriptures, I first focused on the "Heart Sutra", which everyone knows.
The Heart Sutra is the most concise model in Mahayana Buddhism, and it is also an outline of the Prajna Sutra. I think since it is an outline, there are many words, concepts, and philosophies in it that I need to go into in depth little by little, so I will make the Heart Sutra a focus of my research. Today, I am also inspiring everyone in my course. If you want to have a deep understanding of Buddhism, it is best to go deeper into the Heart Sutra.
First of all, I want to explain that the "heart" in the "Heart Sutra" may be misunderstood by many people, thinking that it is the study of the heart, our psychology, our mentality, and our soul, so it is called the "Heart Sutra". In fact, this was not what it meant when it was first translated. The word "heart" refers to the core and the outline. The Heart Sutra is actually the core sutra and the outline sutra of all classics. Do you understand what I mean? It is a classic among classics, a concise version of the classics, which is the Heart Sutra.
Text Interpretation of the Heart Sutra
I think many people will recite the "Heart Sutra", which is "Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva, walking in the deep Prajnaparamita for a long time, saw that the five aggregates are empty, and survived all the hardships. Relic! The form is not different from emptiness, and emptiness is not different from color. Color is empty, and emptiness is color. Reception, thought, and awareness are also like this. Relic! This is the empty phase of all dharmas. They are neither born nor destroyed, nor stained nor pure. It does not increase or decrease. Therefore, there is no form, no thoughts, no eyes, no ears, no nose, no body, no mind. No vision, no unconscious world. There is no end of old age and death. There is no path of suffering, no wisdom, no gain, etc.
I have not finished memorizing it. Many people memorize it every day and many people often copy it. But what is it talking about? I translated it. I used my understanding of Buddhism and the conversion between ancient Chinese and modern language to translate it into a prose that everyone can understand. I believe that it is in line with the original text of the classic and its original philosophical thought. Last year, when my calligraphy exhibition was on display at the National Art Museum of China, the Heart Sutra I wrote and the scene when Master Hsing Yun held up my Heart Sutra to recommend it to Buddhists around the world were displayed, recommending my handwritten text. At the same time, I translated the Heart Sutra into vernacular and posted it on the wall of the exhibition. I found that many visitors were using their mobile phones to take pictures of my vernacular version of the Heart Sutra. It can be seen that everyone memorizes and recites the Heart Sutra, but they are not very clear about the vernacular text of the Heart Sutra. What does he mean? Today I will first read aloud to you what my translation of the Heart Sutra is like.
The essence of the Paramita Heart Sutra is as follows: a Bodhisattva who can observe freely, receives care with the highest wisdom in deep practice, and discovers that all the accumulations in the world are empty and impermanent, so all pain and disasters can be overcome. Relics, all colors in material form are equal to emptiness. It can be said that color is not different from emptiness, and emptiness is not different from color. Color is emptiness, and emptiness is color. In fact, even feelings, imagination, behavior, and insights are like this. Relic, all concepts are empty, so there is no birth or death, no dirt or cleansing, no increase or decrease.
In the empty phase, there are no real substances, feelings, imaginations, behaviors, and insights. There are no real eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. There are also no real vision, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and memory. All kinds of definitions from vision to consciousness do not exist. In the emptiness, there is neither senseless darkness nor the end of ignorance; there is neither the reincarnation of old age nor the end of old age and death; there is neither the accumulation of suffering nor the cessation of suffering; there is neither mechanism nor gain.
Precisely because he gained nothing, the great Bodhisattva relied on his great wisdom to transcend. He had no worries and obstacles in his heart, so he had no fear. He was able to stay away from all kinds of upside-down dreams and finally achieved true liberation - Nirvana.
In the past, present and future, as long as the enlightened person transcends them with great wisdom, he can achieve the highest enlightenment. The salvation of great wisdom is the sacred mantra, the light mantra, the supreme mantra, the incomparable mantra. This mantra can remove all suffering from sentient beings, and it is true. So, let us chant this mantra - go, go, to the other side. Everyone, go and wake up quickly!
This is my translation of the Heart Sutra. We’ll talk about that next time.