Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu. Let’s continue yesterday’s lesson.
Last time I talked about the loss of control of digitalization, which is a very big blind spot in China. This blind spot is the loss of empirical thinking. Anyone who studies ancient Chinese culture will feel this problem, especially the famous sinologist Dr. Joseph Needham, who has made a very high evaluation of ancient Chinese science and technology. He also discovered this problem. He said, why does China care so little about empirical evidence and the accuracy of figures? He believes this is related to the long-term bureaucracy in our society, which dilutes positivism. How could bureaucracy dilute positivism? Joseph Needham gave four reasons that we can listen to.
Perjury and falsification
Joseph Needham said that he puts praise and blame above the truth and does not pursue the truth, but only pursues eternal conclusions. The so-called eternal conclusion is to divide the people of the world into loyal and traitorous, righteous and evil, merit and demerit, right and wrong, but it does not care about the truth and falsehood. In Chinese culture, the distinction between right and wrong always far outweighs the distinction between truth and falsehood, and before the truth of the matter is clear, there will be a lot of discussion. We can often see in the media now that no matter how things are, there are just a lot of people talking about them.
Joseph Needham said that in addition to putting praise and blame before reality, the second point is that ancient Chinese culture puts ritual before reality; the third point is that it puts ideals before reality; and the fourth point is that it completely denies the reality outside the system. After Joseph Needham talked about these four points, he said that reality is like an ink painting that has been washed over and over again, getting lighter and lighter. This matter has become a very big problem for China. Later, it became difficult for us to advocate the development of science and the advancement of various new technologies, and this is related to it.
Because we deny empirical evidence so much, we despise empirical evidence so much, and we care so much about casual numbers, Chinese culture has encountered a very big problem called perjury. After a large amount of perjury comes out, we cannot prove that it is false. Therefore, there is a reversal of the words here, one is called perjury, and the other is called falsification, which means to prove that it is false. The ability to falsify is very important, and our Chinese culture lacks this ability.
Think about it, no matter what your identity is or how old you are, if you encounter a rumor, you can only shout loudly that it is a rumor, and there is no procedure to falsify it. Even if it is found, others are not interested, and no one is willing to listen to the process and procedures of falsification. So many people commit suicide because of rumors because they can't find this program. This is a shortcoming of Chinese culture, that is, it cannot be verified. After a large amount of perjury appears, we cannot prove that it is false, so we have no ability to falsify it. Remember, perjury is bad, falsification is good, falsification is an ability, but we lack this ability.
After China's reform and opening up, this problem has been largely solved in our economic data, which is very optimistic. But from a cultural perspective, this problem is far from being solved, because how can a cultural blind spot that has existed for many years be completely solved in the process of economic development? Economic development can solve part of the problem, but it is unlikely to solve it completely. The numbers we see in our economic indicators are all credible, but why do so many people in society with high IQs believe in rumors? And no matter what level of people this rumor falls on, these people don't have a strategy to deal with it? This problem certainly cannot be solved by digital economic figures, so we still need to think more about this problem culturally.
Honesty and facts
For example, no matter how smart a person is, when we encounter a piece of social information, the first thing we think about is whether the information can meet our inner expectations; the second thing we think about is how stimulating the information is; and the third thing we think about is where the source of the information is. However, if asked whether the information is true or not, we seem to be relatively slow in this regard and care less. We quickly become a transmitter of information that does not know whether it is true or false.
This is like a game we played when we were kids, the flower-passing game. The drums are beating and we pass the flowers on. When we pass the flowers, we may have some doubts about the rumor, but we will soon get rid of it. Because the information came from the front, I did not verify it, and the people in front have verified it. Then I will soon pass it on to others, and others will probably verify it. As a result, no one has verified it from the beginning to the end. The people in front of me have not verified it, and the people behind me have not verified it. If I don’t verify it, the people in front of me and the people behind me are just like me. The result was that the rumors completely controlled him. If someone is skeptical about the rumors, they will become a slow person in this flower-passing game. Instead, they will become a loser and a spoiler in the game, and they will be eliminated from the game.
Therefore, in our culture, as long as people have some doubts about the rumors that are spreading wildly, they will be looked at in a different light, eliminated, and become a marginalized figure. This is a bad result of our culture. This has brought about a big shortcoming in our culture, that is, because there is no way to prove it, we rely on some witnesses we found, because they are the only backers of authenticity. I have experienced too many things, and I can attest to this. Even the memories of many of the most honest people in life may not be consistent with the facts. Even the most honest person's memory may not match the facts.
Five or six of us good friends went out for an outing. A month later, everyone may have different memories of the trip. Sometimes I find a very interesting scene. Because the focus is different, some people's memories will also change. For example, I once said that an employee in the school can expose the person who has been knocked down under any circumstances. For example, if the vice principal is knocked down, he will say many, many very bad things about the principal. The head of the department was knocked down. He was just an employee, and he would say many, many bad things that deserved to be knocked down. Later, the vice-principal became a leader again, and this person could come up with many, many positive things about the vice-principal. This department head has become the department head again, and he can think of many positive things about the department head. Is this an opportunist? no.
I have met many such people, who actually have a very low social status and are also very honest people. People's psychological structure is often influenced by social trends of thought. Within the influence of social trends of thought, every memory he has is true. The good things he recalls about the vice-principal are true, and the bad parts are also true, but he has reorganized them according to the trends of thought. After the reorganization, what he said may become a very important reason to overthrow the vice-principal, and it may also be a reason to make the vice-principal very painful, but this whistleblower is not a bad person.
Therefore, in a situation without digital control, even if you find such a witness and we use him as a true basis, the problem will be very serious. Not to mention, many historical consciences in our lives are hidden deep in alleys, and they are unwilling to speak. It is also very possible that in order to cover themselves up, some murderers become the loudest person or even become a fake judge. There are many such situations, so we have disasters again and again.
Call to tell the truth
In life, we encounter too many false signals that have not been empirically proven. I remember one time when Master Hsing Yun, a Buddhist master who often travels between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, gave a private interview and asked him what was the biggest problem facing China at present. Master Hsing Yun is very friendly to mainland China. He thought about it and said, I think it is fake, and it is fake in terms of culture. He is not talking about other falsehoods, he is not saying that economic figures are false, nor is he false about politics. He thinks it is false about culture. To be honest, you will sweat after hearing this.
If you think about it carefully, we don’t talk about Master Xingyun, but we talk about one of our seniors, Ba Jin, whom we all respect very much. The loudest and most repeated call for him in the rest of his life was "tell the truth." He repeatedly asked the cultural community to tell the truth. His last testament in life was also these three words, called "tell the truth." These two old men, Master Xingyun and Old Man Ba ​​Jin, their lifelong calling for truth deserves our careful consideration. Not to mention big disasters, it’s all about small things. We have also been trapped by a lot of false things.
You may still remember that I once served as the chief judge of eight consecutive Grand Prix contests on CCTV. In the process of this competition, there is a link that we designed ourselves, called "Proposition Dialogue". In propositional dialogue, I ask the question and let the other person answer it. We need to look at his overall quality. You can't just sing, you can't just play musical instruments. You must use your language to answer the questions I give you.
It is a pity that when these outstanding contemporary young people face our questions, their answers are always recitative and lyrical, using clichés, big words, empty words, and lies. Most of them are like this. I think since it is a big platform of CCTV, I must use strong language to stop them from doing this. For example, our questions ask them to talk about your teacher or your mother or your childhood. These contestants cannot hear other contestants answer questions. They are isolated from each other, but the national audience is surprised to find that their teachers, their mothers, and their childhoods are the same. They have the same image, the same pain, the same longing, and all their terms are the same. This is obviously false, because they use one standard to apply to their teachers, mothers, and childhoods. This has become a big problem.
Therefore, I say that you have used false methods to make your mother, teachers, and your childhood false. This is something I cannot tolerate. This is the phenomenon of falsehood manifested in our lovely rituals and in our lovely young people. Also, some TV stations often compare the charm of one city with another. Sometimes the mayor or deputy mayor of each city comes out and talks about the charm of his or her city. Except for some major projects, the terms are basically the same. So on this issue, we have obviously entered a devil's nest of using clichés, big words, empty words, and lies to replace authenticity.
Okay, that’s it for today. Let’s meet again next time.