Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu. We continued the lecture and talked about one of the reasons for the longevity of Chinese culture, which is that it has a large land and many people.
I haven’t finished talking about the earth element yet. I talked about the relationship between the earth element and our heart. Big heart is not a derogatory word, it is a very, very good word. When we interact with people from many other countries, there is often a gap in this area. We can be more modest. But we should not think that our vision and magnanimity are our shortcomings. Don't think so.
The space is large, and in addition to the above-mentioned ability to form a force, when China encounters difficulties, this force will slowly be combined. Even in remote areas, it can also assume its own ethical responsibility for the whole, which is rare in other countries.
flow of culture
In addition to its spiritual scale and its power in times of crisis, a large space also provides huge possibilities for the flow of culture, making it impossible for any culture to plunge into a dead end at any time.
When we travel around the world, we often see such a civilization. It was very early and the civilization was very good, but we have no idea why this civilization suddenly disappeared. Is it an infectious disease? Or encountered a war? But when encountering a war, there should be some relics of the war, there should be some remnants of weapons, and there should be some remnants of corpses, but there are none. So where did they go? Not sure. But one thing is certain, this civilization died.
I don’t know where I arrived, I don’t know why I perished, I perished in a quagmire I don’t know where. However, in a sense, it just means that it lacks places to escape, or it has too few roads to choose, so it can only walk in a quagmire and cannot get out. It can't find any other way outside the quagmire.
Because the chassis of Chinese Culture is so large, such situations rarely happen. If a local culture encounters an existential crisis, there are many ways for it to transfer, and the transfer is often to a large place. Moreover, due to its large size, the transferred place is originally within the scope of Chinese culture, so it is easier to take root.
From the Han Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, Chinese culture migrated from the north to the south. This is a great example. The main reason for the migration of the center of Chinese culture from northwest to southeast is climate and climate-related soil erosion. Of course, there were also wars, such as the Yongjia Rebellion, the Anshi Rebellion, etc. In addition to the large-scale natural causes and wars, there are also some small-scale intentional immigrants. The government has intentions, whether it is a development intention or an intention due to population conditions. No matter which kind of migration brings new livelihood opportunities to a country with a large population.
According to statistics, during the Western Han Dynasty, the population ratio between the north and the south was 8:2, 8 in the north and 2 in the south. By the Tang Dynasty, it was evenly divided; by the Southern Song Dynasty, the population ratio between the north and the south was already 3:7, with less in the north and more in the south. This is the great circulation brought about by the Great Migration, which allowed the population to develop and prosper in new places.
Shifting cultural center of gravity
A little smaller than the population shift, but also more important in my opinion is the shift of the cultural center of gravity. A large population is not necessarily the center of cultural focus, but it is related to population, so we narrowed the concept of population to the concept of cultural people.
In my impression, during the Western Han Dynasty, the center of Chinese culture and education was in Shandong; during the Eastern Han Dynasty, it was in Henan; after the Sui and Tang Dynasties, the imperial examination system was established, and there are many numbers in the imperial examination materials that we can refer to. Of course, the imperial examination is not the entire culture, but since all the people are working hard for the imperial examination, it can also be called a coordinate.
Judging from the data, during the Tang and Song Dynasties, there were 68 champions from the north and 44 champions from the south. Obviously, the north was strong and the south was weak. Sometimes people in the South say that we have outstanding people, a long history, and a very powerful culture. This is not the case. If you look at the authors of Tang poems and Song lyrics, their native places must be that there are more people from the north and fewer people from the south.
During the Northern Song Dynasty, Henan Province had the largest number of Jinshi scholars. But in the Yuan, Ming and Qing dynasties, the situation was different. The number one pick from the north was 26, and the number 168 from the south was a complete fall. This is due to population migration and changes in climate, population migration has caused a change in the cultural center.
If the imperial examination system cannot be said to be a substantial cultural change, then let’s talk about the distribution of writers. The situation is also the same. For example, before the Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties, there were always more writers from the north than from the south. By the Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties, the ratio of the north to the south was reversed, and there were more writers from the south. Look at Wang Xizhi and others, they are all in the south. During the Sui and Tang Dynasties, due to the establishment of the political center and the revival of northern culture, the proportion was reversed, becoming six in the north and four in the south.
After the Song Dynasty, the proportion of writers became more focused on the south. But in the Yuan Dynasty, I mentioned Yuan Zaju before. It was a Zaju that was loved by people on horseback who could not understand Chinese well, so the proportion in the north still exceeded that in the south. In the Qing Dynasty, the situation was different. The proportion of writers in the north dropped to 1.5 and in the south rose to 8.5. The gap was huge.
I saw a gentleman named Liao Shihong. In addition to writers and imperial examinations, he made statistics on the distribution of experts who have made outstanding contributions in various fields of society. This is also very interesting. In the Tang Dynasty, the order was Henan, Shaanxi, Hebei, and Jiangsu; in the Song Dynasty, the order was Zhejiang, Jiangxi, and Henan; in the Ming Dynasty, the order was Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Anhui, and Jiangxi; in the Qing Dynasty, the order was Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Anhui. The modern arrangement is Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Hunan, Beijing, Tianjin, Fujian, and Sichuan.
To be fair, this arrangement shows the high degree of cultural migration in China. In other words, the large space caused the Great Migration, and the Great Migration caused the great renewal and retention of culture. It survived the movement, and lived better due to the renewal during the movement.
Why can’t I stay in one place? Because of blockage, because of illness. People will get sick, civilization will get sick, and culture will get sick. After getting sick, doctors always give patients a suggestion: to recuperate in another place. But many patients do not have this condition, which means that many cultures do not have this condition and they cannot move to another place. However, Chinese culture is full of this condition.
The poet's warm wind has cured the wind and cold on the plateau, and the offspring can reproduce there. Future generations may also feel the ill effects of recuperation in a different place, so they return to the north and gain another powerful life.
Okay, let’s talk about that next time.