Hello everyone, my name is Yu Qiuyu. We are now entering the last part of the full-year course, the memory sequence of Chinese context. Last time I talked about Wang Xizhi and Tao Yuanming. I translated two of their articles and read them aloud to everyone. Wang Xizhi's was "Preface to the Lanting Collection" and Tao Yuanming's was "Returning to the Songs". Everyone must have an impression. According to the idea of ​​​​Chinese cultural context, I cannot talk about every point. Now there is no doubt that according to the idea of ​​​​my first part, now we must call for the Tang Dynasty, the great Tang Dynasty.
In the Tang Dynasty, in fact, in the first part of our course, I spent a long time talking about the social atmosphere of the Tang Dynasty. Now my friends in Xi’an reacted very strongly after listening to it. Many of their agencies and schools are listening to me about various scenes in Chang’an in the Tang Dynasty. But I already announced last time that I would put the specific works of Tang Dynasty literature into the last part and appreciate them slowly, so that time has come.
Five memories about Tang poetry
Echoing the atmosphere of the great Tang Dynasty we mentioned earlier, we are now going to talk about Tang poetry. The backbone of the literature of the Tang Dynasty, or the context of the Tang Dynasty, is Tang poetry. Moreover, Tang poetry is not entirely the backbone of Tang Dynasty literature, it is also one of the backbones of Chinese literature as a whole. When you meet a Chinese overseas, there may be two people who speak some Chinese at first, and they can speak quite well. But if you want to talk in depth, you need to understand his cultural level. Generally speaking, the stupid way is to ask about his academic qualifications. The smart way is to mention a few Tang poems. If something resonates with him, generally speaking, you can judge that he is an educated Chinese devotee. Therefore, it can be roughly stated that Tang poetry is one of the starting points, or one of the foundations, of a person's Chinese cultural accomplishment. This is very important.
We need to spend a little time on the concept of memory of Tang poetry, not only in the course, but also in daily life, and in Tang poetry, because this determines our identification of Chinese culture and also determines your familiarity and understanding of Chinese culture.
So, how many Tang poems should be memorized? I believe that every one of our students is quite troubled by this, because from some of our TV programs, some of our friends have memorized many Tang poems, and they spit out very unfamiliar Tang poems casually. At this point, everyone admires them on the one hand, and at the same time has a certain panic about ourselves, saying that I am not a complete stranger to Chinese classical literature, but I don't know all those Tang poems, so there is a memory range, degree of memory, and division called Tang poetry. To be fair, this is a knowledge in itself, and there have always been many disputes.
I would like to talk about the following points for your reference. I will talk about five points about the memory of Tang poetry. I believe this is very important for many Chinese teachers. In fact, it is also very important for each of us to improve our cultural literacy.
First, my point is that Tang poetry is too prosperous. What does prosperity mean? That is, its quantity is large and its quality is high. Because of the large quantity and high quality, we have to keep the door of memory closed. If you memorize every song, your brain will explode. The quantity is too large, and the more the better. If more is better, Tang poetry will become a very heavy memory burden. After becoming a very heavy memory burden, it will detract from the unrestrained and light desire required for poetry. Therefore, I hope that students can be as strict as possible in the selection of Tang poetry.
The choice itself is a test to judge your taste. Let me ask you, if you choose ten songs, how many would you choose? Which of the twenty songs would you choose? This is a test for you. It depends on your taste. If I memorize 500 poems at once, or memorize 1,000 poems at once, I think it proves that you are just a computer and have no taste. This is the first one.
Second, Tang poetry has always been relatively popular. We need to raise the requirements for memorizing Tang poetry. That is, we must learn to memorize the most important Tang poetry and be able to spit it out casually. When spitting out, as I said before, when you are in a foreign country, not only in a foreign country, but also when chatting in general, you will often mention Tang poetry to understand each other's cultural level. Tang poetry should become a popular classical element in the Chinese language. But we need to make the components really components, not parts. I see a lot of people on TV programs now treating classical poetry like parts, scattered in a pile, just like all the parts scattered around in your tool room. Do you think this is okay? No, because this doesn't work at all, so it needs to be turned into a component. If it is a component, what are the most important components? What components are waiting for the second time? Be clear. This is the second one.
The third item is the recitation of Tang poems. I say that the most important Tang poems should be recited, but there are some differences in this recitation due to the different lengths of Tang poems. For example, what we generally hope students can recite proficiently are Wujue, Qijue, Wulu, Qilu, just these genres. Although those longer ancient-style songs are very important, I put them in the scope of expanded memory, which is the second-level memory scope. For example, Li Bai's "Sleepwalking Tianmu Says Farewell", Bai Juyi's "Song of Everlasting Sorrow", and Zhang Ruoxu's "Spring River Flower Moonlight Night". These are actually very important. Li Bai, Bai Juyi, and Zhang Ruoxu are all important. These poems are also very important, but I have not put them in the part that must be recited, because the length is a bit longer. Let's put it here. If you have more time, you can recite it briefly.
The fourth point is that there is a problem of ordering in Tang poetry. What I am talking about is, for example, how many songs are there, whether they are important or not, whether they are worth reciting or not, this sorting is very knowledgeable. I hope that all our teachers, the university and middle school teachers who take my classes, and the teachers who teach classical literature, will pay attention to what criteria we use to select Tang poetry, and then there needs to be a sorting.
The ranking is like this. Zhonghua Book Company has published a book called "Tang Poetry Ranking". This book is actually quite good, with rigorous and scientific value. What did it choose? It is based on various data on how Tang poetry has been selected and commented on in ancient and modern times, including which poetry book it was selected for, how many times it was selected, and how many scholars mentioned and commented on it. However, what I value more is the degree of familiarity and praise among the people of the past dynasties, because the familiarity and praise among the common people involves many issues in cultural anthropology. Why do the common people like this song? You scholars have not commented much, but why do the common people like this song? The common people like this song, and there must be various reasons for it. This reason seems to you that the common people are uneducated, but no, that just involves issues of human culture. Is that why it touches the hearts of ordinary people? Why was it that I was moved at that time, and then moved again later, again and again? What’s the reason?
In this sense, although the selection of scholars and the number of commentaries written by scholars should also be taken into consideration, what is more important is the extent to which it is praised and disseminated in society. This is very important, because praise is actually a kind of screening and elimination. It has been passed down from generation to generation and eliminated from generation to generation, so the current eulogies are actually more important than the ancient eulogies. The popularity of this poem in the Tang Dynasty was not as important as its popularity today. In addition, there must be a very important reason why it is still being recited after so many years.
My choice of Tang poetry
There is another question regarding the arrangement of Tang poems: should they be arranged based on poets or based on poems? Many of our anthologies focus on the style and content of poetry. For example, "Three Hundred Tang Poems" uses style. For example, this is the seven unique styles, this is the five unique styles, and this is the individual style. The styles are divided into people. Well, I am arranging them based on people, and the basic order is Li Bai, Du Fu, Wang Wei, and Bai Juyi. Then which poem by Li Bai is placed first? Then we need to look at the historical data and the extent to which he was valued in history, whether in academia or among the people, to what extent he was valued.
In this case, after I talked about the five principles above, I determined the scope of Tang poetry that must be memorized, basic memorized and expanded memorized in our course. This is also a big deal. How should I classify the Tang poems that our students taking this course must memorize? Which Tang poems must be memorized? What is the quantity?
To be fair, I have spent decades thinking about this issue. Because I have long felt that as a young Chinese man, how many familiar sentences from Tang poems are left in his mind? This is very important.
In the Qing Dynasty, "Three Hundred Tang Poems" was compiled. To be fair, this was the rhythm of life in the Qing Dynasty at that time, and the interest capacity of the cultural people in the Qing Dynasty. According to this standard, according to what we see today, three hundred songs are definitely too many, and too many. Because the pace of life and interest capacity of ordinary young people are limited, three hundred poems to memorize is obviously too much, and the content is very different from what we have now. As I mentioned before, he sometimes has no income from those poems that the common people like very much, and he has collected a lot of poems that are difficult to be sensitive to now.
Later, in the 1960s, another edition was published called "One Hundred Tang Poems", which seems to be too much now. If we want a hundred poems, it is completely to let today's young people memorize a hundred Tang poems according to their pace of life. I think it is too much.
Later, more than ten years ago, Xi'an Qujiang New District, as everyone knows in Qujiang New District, it was a very important event for the number one scholar to visit Qujiang in Chang'an, and Qujiang was an important hometown of Tang poetry. In order to attract Chinese and foreign tourists, they hoped to carve some stele of Tang poetry. This is an important place for reciting Tang poetry. To carve a stele, they asked me to be their consultant and asked me, how many do you think they should include? I said, who is this monument for? His carvings are for ordinary Chinese and foreign tourists to see. I said that since it is for Chinese and foreign tourists, I think there should be at most twenty poems, not too many. The dense layers have turned into a forest of steles, and it would be difficult for ordinary tourists to stop there and read carefully, twenty poems. Since we still have to engrave a monument, there is nothing we can do about it.
According to my students, memorizing twenty poems is too few, because the amount of twenty poems is a bit strict for engraving on monuments, but if we want to memorize them, we don’t need to engrave them on monuments. We just engrave them in our minds, and twenty poems are too few.
Therefore, after repeated weighing, weighing, and deliberation, I decided to choose fifty Tang poems that students in our course should memorize, and then reserve forty poems. You don’t need to memorize these forty poems, you just need to read them familiarly. Of course, all the doctoral students who are listening to my lectures in the course and I directly supervise them, I hope that the next forty poems will also be familiar enough to recite.
Okay, do you understand? The 50 Tang poems that I have chosen to memorize for this course are 50, and there are 40 in reserve. This is for familiarity. The doctoral students I supervise must be able to recite these 90 poems, but the first 50 must be memorized very proficiently. If you understand this, I will now solemnly announce the contents of the fifty poems. I hope everyone can take note of them. But in the future, after I finish this class, I will publish a book.
If you just memorize this, it may be a little difficult to listen to it with your ears, but I insist on this repeatedly so that everyone's ears can have a good ear, and they all seem to have heard it. Therefore, I still have to read, one by one, and read the important sentences, so that everyone feels that I have heard them. I remembered that when I was in elementary school, I was taught Tang poetry. After my elementary school teacher read it, we children still remember it in our minds many years later. We read it along, but we still remember it. Like when I was a child in rural Zhejiang, all I read were in dialect, and the teacher also spoke in dialect. Even though when I got older, I still remembered these sentences in dialect. Later, I needed to correct them, but because I heard them, I remembered them. Sometimes in that sentence, we didn’t quite understand these words and sentences at the time, as children, so it was still important to listen.
Li Bai's "Early Departure from Baidi City"
The basis of Tang poetry that must be recited, the first one selected is Li Bai's "Early Departure from Baidi City". Whether it is ancient or modern, many data show that this poem can be ranked first. The poem is like this. I think all of us here can recite it.
"In the midst of the colorful clouds of the White Emperor, thousands of miles of rivers and mountains are returned in one day. The apes on both sides of the bank can't stop crying, and the light boat has passed the Ten Thousand Mountains."
This poem is like this. To put it simply, everyone knows that during the Anshi Rebellion, that is, the Anlushan Rebellion, Li Bai wanted to participate in countering the rebellion, but he followed the wrong person. His mistake was not his fault, but a mistake on the political map of the Tang Dynasty at that time. Suzong, who succeeded him at that time, had an opposition and conflict with his younger brother Yong Wang Li Lin. Although they were both fighting against the Anshi Rebellion, the two of them had conflicts. In the process, Lushan, where Li Bai was located at that time, happened to be the territory of Yongwang Li Lin. At Li Lin's invitation, he joined his shogunate and became his think tank. Therefore, when the two sons of the royal family had conflicts, Li Bai was on the wrong team. After he was on the wrong team, many people framed him and caused mischief to him, so he was imprisoned. Although he did not die, he was exiled to a far away place, and Yelang was exiled.
However, more than a year later, in 759 AD, because there was a drought in China at that time, a severe drought in Guanzhong, the emperor often did this. When encountering natural disasters, he would release some prisoners to express some kind of plea to God and grant amnesty to the world. Then at this time, Li Bai was forgiven. Forgiveness meant that he did not have to go far to exile Yelang. That was too far, so he was not guilty. The crime was guilty and he was forgiven. At that time, Li Bai was actually almost sixty years old, and he was already old. At this time, he was very happy, and his guilty body was suddenly free, so he set off from Baidi City to Jiangling.
You see, "Cha Ci Bai Di is among the colorful clouds, and thousands of miles of rivers and mountains are returned in one day. The apes on both sides of the bank can't stop crying, and the boat has passed the Ten Thousand Mountains." He was so happy, and his joy was expressed. But I have to say that the journey he took after being spared this time was actually very painful. Even though he was so happy, where was he going? He has no salary and no job. He actually relies on the help of others to survive. Therefore, he finally found one of his clan uncles, his clan uncle, and a clan uncle of Dangtu County Magistrate, and then he lived there.
Therefore, I feel that this is our great poet's last high-spirited and exciting journey through nature, so we put this poem first.
That’s it for today, we’ll talk about it next time.